For years, enrolled employees were automatically enrolled in an 80/20 health benefit plan, where 80% of health care costs were covered and employees were required to pay 20%. For years, enrolled employees were automatically enrolled in an 80/20 health benefit plan, where 80% of health care costs were covered and employees were required to pay 20%. In 2012, employees will be automatically enrolled in the 70/30 health benefit plan unless they report to being a non-smoker and having a BMI below 35 kg/m2. In this study, we assessed the awareness, attitudes, beliefs, and motivation of overweight state employees covered by the NC State Health Plan who would be directly affected by these health plan changes prior to the health benefit changes going into effect. Employees’ perception of their BMI status will not necessarily match their actual (measured) BMI status.Employees in the highest BMI categories would be less likely to favor the new benefit plan changes, to believe in its potential for helping employees lose weight, and to report confidence in their ability to lose weight compared to employees in lower BMI categories.Overweight employees who smoke would be less likely to favor the new benefit plan changes or believe in its potential for helping employees quit smoking compared with former smokers and non-smokers. Those who responded to having a malignancy requiring chemotherapy or radiation in past 5 years, answered yes to any of the Physical Activity Readiness Questionnaire (PAR-Q) questions [10], or had a BMI of 42 kg/m2 or greater were required to obtain physician’s consent prior to participating in the study.In October-November 2009, 690 (68% response rate) participants completed a 12-month WAY to Health follow-up assessment by completing a survey which included questions about the new State Health Plan changes reported here. Other characteristics of the respondents (e.g., age, gender, race, education, household income, marital status, current health status) were not significantly associated with the attitudes or beliefs regarding the health plan changes, controlling for the respondents’ BMI category and smoking status, so these results were not included in this paper. From the perspective of employers, health insurance surcharges or limiting benefits for employees with risk factors associated with leading chronic diseases such as smoking and obesity, may be considered a more desired option than other forms of cost shifting [3]. Moreover, respondents with BMI ≥ 40 were more likely to report that the new health benefit change would not be effective in helping employees lose weight (Table 3). When asked if the new health benefit change would help smokers quit, 18.0% of the respondents provided a favorable response, while 51.6% did not report it would be helpful. Current smokers were also less likely (5.3%) to believe this new health benefit change will help smokers quit than were former smokers (23.6%) and non-smokers (16.5%) (P=0.02) (Table 5).Most (68.4%) current smokers reported that the new smoking-related State Health Plan benefit change would motivate them to attempt to quit smoking, while 34.2% said the new smoking State Health Plan benefit change would increase their stress and make them smoke more (Table 4). This cost-shift may place surcharges on high-risk behaviors within the context of health benefit plan changes, thus alleviating costs to the employer and shifting them to the high-risk employee. This cost-shift may place surcharges on high-risk behaviors within the context of health benefit plan changes, thus alleviating costs to the employer and shifting them to the high-risk employee. This study took advantage of a unique opportunity to reveal attitudes and beliefs about health plan changes from overweight employees prior to the enactment of a new lifestyle-related health benefit plan change that would likely affect them directly given their weight status. Our results indicate that many state employees who are likely to be affected by health plan changes related to BMI often underestimated their true BMI, and thus, did not understand that their weight would affect their health benefit plan status. Moreover, among these overweight or obese individuals, current smokers and those with higher BMI categories were less likely to report that the tobacco and weight-related benefit plan changes were a good idea, or would help them quit smoking or lose weight. Yet even among study participants who were told about the benefit changes and were being weighed at regular intervals, a proportion of them were unable to categorize their BMI accurately and were therefore unaware of the need to take appropriate steps to avoid additional health care costs. Thus, It is important for plan administrators to communicate about policies so that individuals understand the potential costs they might face and can accurately determine their weight and BMI prior to implementation of the plan changes. Strengths and LimitationsOne strength of this study is that we have polled a large sample of employees who were overweight and thus at higher risk of being affected by these health plan changes prior to the implementation of the change. Health benefit plan changes that require employees who are obese or smoke pay more for health care may motivate some individuals to change their behaviors. Communication efforts can assist employees in understanding the new health insurance benefit changes in advance of their implementation, including the potential costs they might face. Future studies could assess smoking, weight, and cost-related changes resulting from the health plan policy to build the evidence base for the design and implementation of health benefit plan changes that produce desired behavioral outcomes, as well as to clarify for whom these interventions are most and least effective. 