Social Attention as a Unitary ConstructIt is not by accident that social attention has been characterized in each of the functional categories discussed here. Social Attention as a Unitary ConstructIt is not by accident that social attention has been characterized in each of the functional categories discussed here. Social Attention as a Unitary ConstructIt is not by accident that social attention has been characterized in each of the functional categories discussed here. Social Attention as a Unitary ConstructIt is not by accident that social attention has been characterized in each of the functional categories discussed here. To examine this question will require systematic comparison of each functional category under both social and non-social contexts across development.If the social context does indeed support the development of social attention functions in unique ways, it may be that social attention functions discussed here are initially relatively distinct, but emerge as a unitary process during the course of typical developmental pathways. Although evidence for such dissociability would not necessarily imply the existence of some native specialized module for the processing of social information or for the processing of information acquired within social contexts, it seems entirely plausible that social and non-social attention may be parcellated developmentally, much like other types of expertize or automaticity that have been described in the developmental and cognitive literatures. To identify whether these social attention functions—social visual attention, social motivation, social behavior—are unique (or convergent) developmental processes, this question should be directly examined by including multiple measures of each functional aspect.Aside from our understanding of the underlying structure of cognition and cognitive development, the existence of a dissociable mode of social attention would, in fact, have a number of important implications for our interpretation of research on attentional processes and their development. Other important potential implications relate to the development of intervention and treatment programs for such disorders. For example, differentiating between an individuals’ attention to others’ use of nonverbal communication behaviors (i.e., joint attention) and attention to others in the absence of their use of cueing behaviors (i.e., social visual attention) may be theoretically meaningful, and would certainly bear on the measurement and operationalization of social attention. We have asked here whether current use of the term social attention is an independent construct (whether any forms of social attention can be differentiated from the same domain of activity in a non-social context) and if it reflects a unitary process (whether all forms of social attention are equal)—the answers to both of these questions are critical next steps to establish social attention as a useful construct. social and personality literature referencing effects elicited by the presence of social observers (e.g., social blushing, inter-personal factors);applied behavior analytic literature referencing the reinforcing value of others’ attention for problem behaviors (e.g., functional analyses);geriatric psychology literature referencing social supports in treatment;social policy statements. To place this increase in perspective, more than 50% of the articles considered here were published between 2010 and 2014. To place this increase in perspective, more than 50% of the articles considered here were published between 2010 and 2014. Studies reviewed are summarized in the Supplemental Materials in table form (including study purpose; major findings; operationalization of social attention; definition of social attention, if given; and functional categorization based on the conceptual approach described below). Studies reviewed are summarized in the Supplemental Materials in table form (including study purpose; major findings; operationalization of social attention; definition of social attention, if given; and functional categorization based on the conceptual approach described below). Studies reviewed are summarized in the Supplemental Materials in table form (including study purpose; major findings; operationalization of social attention; definition of social attention, if given; and functional categorization based on the conceptual approach described below). Studies reviewed are summarized in the Supplemental Materials in table form (including study purpose; major findings; operationalization of social attention; definition of social attention, if given; and functional categorization based on the conceptual approach described below). These communicative actions begin early in the first months of life when an infant shares eye-to-eye gaze with a parent and ‘looks where someone else is looking’ (Butterworth & Jarrett, 1991; Scaife & Bruner, 1975). We consider these functions next. Social Attention as Social MotivationClinical research uses the term social attention broadly to characterize dysfunction in monitoring and decoding of social cues in a variety of clinical disorders, including individuals with anxiety disorders (Gardner, Pickett, Jefferis, & Knowles, 2005), attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (Stroes, Alberts, & Van Der Meere, 2003), schizophrenia (Nestor, Klein, Pomplun, Niznikiewicz, & McCarley, 2010), Williams Syndrome (Riby & Hancock, 2008), Cornelia-Lange Syndrome (Sarimski, 2007) and ASD. In another example, Wu and Kirkham (2010) compared infant attention shifting to social cues (i.e., movie of a smiling female saying ‘Hi baby, look at this!’ while looking toward one corner of screen containing an animal animation) and non-social cues (i.e., colored box appearing around the corner of the screen containing an animal animation).Importantly, the questionable applicability of standard lab-based studies of attention to conspecifics in real-world contexts has been acknowledged (Birmingham & Kingstone, 2009; Kingstone, 2009; Risko et al , 2012). In another example, Wu and Kirkham (2010) compared infant attention shifting to social cues (i.e., movie of a smiling female saying ‘Hi baby, look at this!’ while looking toward one corner of screen containing an animal animation) and non-social cues (i.e., colored box appearing around the corner of the screen containing an animal animation).Importantly, the questionable applicability of standard lab-based studies of attention to conspecifics in real-world contexts has been acknowledged (Birmingham & Kingstone, 2009; Kingstone, 2009; Risko et al , 2012). This group of studies highlights the need to for an empirical approach to determine the equivalence of social stimuli presented across studies (e.g., simple, static representations of social relevant stimuli compared to real-world, live social interaction; see also Risko et al ), as well as systematic examination of the role of context and the valence of the social signal itself.A limited number of studies have examined other components of basic visual attention (e.g., visual preference; decrement in looking) in the context of social events. To advance this behavioral neuroscience and developmental neurocognitive literature, the conceptual and operational definition of social attention must be clearly articulated. To advance this behavioral neuroscience and developmental neurocognitive literature, the conceptual and operational definition of social attention must be clearly articulated. Whether social attention in any of its functions and forms can be differentiated from other non-social domains of activity has been rarely examined in a direct way.One possibility would be that early in development, attention regulation capacity in the context of non-social and social events is isomorphic, but begins to diverge during the 8–12 month period, concurrent with the emergence of endogenous attention and executive function (resulting from brain maturation) along with cortical specialization for social stimuli, and ultimately becomes independent through the expression of social interaction behaviors (e.g., joint attention, nonverbal communication). 