Mice were sacrificed and transendothelial extravasation of albumin-bound Evans blue dye was quantified in excised lungs. While lungs from wild-type mice showed visible and spectrophotometrically quantifiable increases in Evans blue dye extravasation (~40% increase), lungs from MALT1PD/PD mice showed a slight decrease in extravasation relative to PBS-treated controls (~30% decrease) (Figures 5G and 5H). While lungs from wild-type mice showed visible and spectrophotometrically quantifiable increases in Evans blue dye extravasation (~40% increase), lungs from MALT1PD/PD mice showed a slight decrease in extravasation relative to PBS-treated controls (~30% decrease) (Figures 5G and 5H). While lungs from wild-type mice showed visible and spectrophotometrically quantifiable increases in Evans blue dye extravasation (~40% increase), lungs from MALT1PD/PD mice showed a slight decrease in extravasation relative to PBS-treated controls (~30% decrease) (Figures 5G and 5H). The direct NF-κB induction mediated by MALT1 is thought to occur primarily through its scaffolding activity, whereby it recruits IKK activating enzymes to bring them into proximity with NEMO and the other components of the IKK complex (Afonina et al , 2015). The direct NF-κB induction mediated by MALT1 is thought to occur primarily through its scaffolding activity, whereby it recruits IKK activating enzymes to bring them into proximity with NEMO and the other components of the IKK complex (Afonina et al , 2015). Furthermore, this MALT1 proteolytic activity has a surprising biologic effect unrelated to NF-κB signaling; specifically, MALT1-dependent CYLD cleavage acutely alters endothelial structural integrity, thereby impacting vascular permeability (Figure 6). Thus, MALT1 appears to have a dual role in the vasculature, facilitating both leukocyte recruitment via induction of NF-κB-responsive adhesion molecules, and transmural leukocyte migration via an NF-κB-independent effect on the permeability barrier. There are multiple settings in which this could have therapeutic benefit. There are multiple settings in which this could have therapeutic benefit. Since active inflammation in the intimal/sub-endothelial space is a critical feature that distinguishes unstable atherosclerotic plaque, susceptible to rupture, from stable plaque (Hansson et al , 2015; Weber and Noels, 2011), one could speculate that MALT1 inhibition might reduce transmigration of activated leukocytes through the arterial endothelial barrier and into this space, thereby reducing the risk of acute coronary events in the setting of advanced atherosclerosis. This in turn contributes to NF-κB dependent induction of adhesion molecules, facilitating the homing of immune cells to sites of tissue inflammation (Delekta et al , 2010). Tube formation and Electric Cell-substrate Impedance Sensing (ECIS)Tube formation assays were performed on growth factor-reduced (GFR) Matrigel™ Matrix (BD Biosciences) and visualized using either phase contrast microscopy or fluorescence microscopy after staining with ActinRed™ 555 ReadyProbes® reagent (Life Technologies). See Supplemental Experimental Procedures for a detailed description. Assessment of pulmonary vascular leakageMice were perfused with Evans blue dye, administered through the external jugular vein, and treated ± TRAP-6. Extravascular Evans blue dye was quantified from perfused, excised lungs using formamide extraction and spectrophotometric quantification at 620 and 740 nm. See Supplemental Experimental Procedures for a detailed description. Statistical analysisWhen experiments involved only two conditions, differences in means were evaluated for statistical significance using one- or two-tailed, unpaired Student’s t-test, as appropriate. In the latter case, significant differences between treatments were assessed using Tukey’s test, while Dunnet’s test was used to compare each individual treatment to controls. Sidak’s correction was used to account for multiple testing. Taken together, the findings described here suggest that pharmaceutical targeting of MALT1 protease activity may have broader implications than previously expected. Thrombin induces endothelial permeability in a MALT1 protease dependent, but NF-κB independent, mannerPrevious studies have suggested that while MALT1 protease activity has a major role in fine-tuning the level of NF-κB activation achieved after lymphocytes are stimulated with antigen, there may be other roles for the protease. We had already shown that thrombin stimulation of protease activated receptor-1 (PAR1), the principal thrombin receptor on endothelial cells, induces NF-κB activation through the CBM pathway in a manner very much analogous to the mechanism by which antigen receptors induce NF-κB in lymphocytes (Delekta et al , 2010). Notably, PAR1 activation produces a rapid and reversible increase in paracellular endothelial permeability (Hirano, 2007; Vandenbroucke et al , 2008). As such, the complex plays a critical role in the adaptive immune system; deficiencies in any of the three components, in both humans and mice, lead to impaired lymphocyte activation in the face of antigenic challenge and to susceptibility to infection (Perez de Diego et al , 2015; Thome, 2004; Turvey et al , 2014). As such, the complex plays a critical role in the adaptive immune system; deficiencies in any of the three components, in both humans and mice, lead to impaired lymphocyte activation in the face of antigenic challenge and to susceptibility to infection (Perez de Diego et al , 2015; Thome, 2004; Turvey et al , 2014). Cells respond similarly when treated with Thrombin Receptor Activator Peptide-6 (TRAP-6), a six amino acid peptide that acts as a selective ligand for PAR1 and mimics thrombin activation of this receptor (Coughlin, 2000) (Figure S1D). In contrast, z-VRPR-fmk did not prevent canonical signaling to IκB (Figure S1E), consistent with what has been shown in lymphocytes following antigen receptor activation (Hailfinger et al , 2011). Indeed, like thrombin, both histamine and LPA act through Gαq/11 / Gα12/13-linked GPCRs, which at least in the case of LPA receptors, have been shown to engage the CBM complex in other cellular contexts (Klemm et al , 2007; Wang et al , 2007). The integrity of these structures depends, in part, upon maintenance of continuous contact between the endothelial cells, so that the same stimuli that cause endothelial retraction and paracellular permeability can also induce tube collapse (Bayless and Davis, 2004). The integrity of these structures depends, in part, upon maintenance of continuous contact between the endothelial cells, so that the same stimuli that cause endothelial retraction and paracellular permeability can also induce tube collapse (Bayless and Davis, 2004). However, the CAP-Gly domains alone are unable to efficiently mediate microtubule stabilization (Trompouki et al , 2009). Regardless of the precise mechanism, it appears that the N- and C-terminal domains function optimally only when together, with the N-terminal CAP-Gly domains mediating the recruitment of CYLD to microtubules, and the C-terminal domain mediating necessary enzymatic or other activities to fully stabilize microtubules.Interestingly, the MALT1-specific cleavage site, as determined through studies of activated T lymphocytes, is located just C-terminal to the CAP-Gly domains, following position R324 (Staal et al , 2011) (Figure 2A). To test this idea, we first looked for evidence of PAR1-dependent CYLD cleavage in SVEC and EA.hy926 cells, and found that 10 or more minutes of TRAP-6 treatment resulted in the generation of both the 70 and 40 kD CYLD fragments that would be predicted to result from cleavage at R324 (Figures 2B, 2C, S4A, and S4B). To test this idea, we first looked for evidence of PAR1-dependent CYLD cleavage in SVEC and EA.hy926 cells, and found that 10 or more minutes of TRAP-6 treatment resulted in the generation of both the 70 and 40 kD CYLD fragments that would be predicted to result from cleavage at R324 (Figures 2B, 2C, S4A, and S4B). To test this idea, we first looked for evidence of PAR1-dependent CYLD cleavage in SVEC and EA.hy926 cells, and found that 10 or more minutes of TRAP-6 treatment resulted in the generation of both the 70 and 40 kD CYLD fragments that would be predicted to result from cleavage at R324 (Figures 2B, 2C, S4A, and S4B). MALT1-dependent CYLD cleavage drives microtubule disruption and associated ROCK activationWe next testing whether blocking PAR1-induced MALT1 protease activity would correlate with a blockade in microtubule disruption. To this end, we generated SVEC cells that stably express either wild-type CYLD or a non-cleavable mutant of CYLD, which contains a single amino acid substitution converting the critical P1 arginine at the cleavage site to alanine (R324A) (Staal et al , 2011) (Figure S5A). Cells were imaged over a 2-minute period immediately before the addition of thrombin, and then again either immediately after addition (Figures 3C-3E), or following a 5-minute delay (Figure S5B and S5C). However, MYPT1 phosphorylation is known to be catalyzed not only by ROCK but also by several other kinases (Mikelis et al , 2015). ROCK, in turn, directly phosphorylates MLC to promote actin-myosin stress fiber formation, while it also contributes to the phosphorylation and inhibition of MLC phosphatase, thereby preserving levels of p-MLC. Thus, this CYLD mutant, resistant to MALT1-dependent cleavage (Staal et al , 2011), acts in a dominant negative fashion, suggesting that CYLD cleavage is required for efficient PAR1-induced endothelial permeability and tube disruption.The results support the overall hypothesis that cleavage-dependent separation of the CYLD N-terminal microtubule-binding and C-terminal microtubule-stabilization domains renders the protein unable to perform its functions with regard to maintaining microtubules. Specifically, we perfused mice through the jugular vein with Evans blue dye along with either TRAP-6 or PBS vehicle, as described (Kaneider et al , 2007; Patterson et al , 1992). 