The cohesin complex and the Ftz-F1/Hr39 nuclear receptors are conserved in regulating both axon and dendrite pruning (Yu, unpublished). Likewise, Hdc and Ik2 specifically regulate ddaC dendrite pruning. Another fundamental difference between these two systems is the involvement of caspases, which are activated during ddaC dendrite pruning but not MB axon pruning. Mushroom body developmentThe remodeling of MB γ neurons during metamorphosis has become an attractive model system to study developmental axon pruning. Second, these differential mechanisms might result from the differences in the CNS vs PNS, resulting in structural and environmental differences between MB γ neurons and ddaC neurons. Future studies will undoubtedly provide further evidence of conserved and differential mechanisms for axon and dendrite pruning in MB and ddaC neurons in Drosophila. However, the mechanisms of MT elimination and its requirement for axon pruning of MB neurons remain unknown.The fact that pruning involves axon fragmentation posits the existence of phagocytic cells to clear the remaining debris. Indeed, glial cells have been shown to engulf axonal debris [15, 16], dependent on the engulfment receptor Draper (Drpr, CED-1 homolog) [17, 18] and CED-6 [17]. Recently, two studies have highlighted astrocytes as the major phagocytic glia [19, 20] in a process that depends on Drpr [19, 20] functioning in parallel to CED-12 [19]. While during normal development astrocytes are the primary cells that engulf degenerated axons, inhibiting drpr or both drpr and ced-12 in astrocytes results in a delay or modest defect of fragment clearance [19, 20], suggesting that other unknown cells might take over when astrocytes are defective.A second role of glia is to instruct the initiation of axon pruning [21]. While during normal development astrocytes are the primary cells that engulf degenerated axons, inhibiting drpr or both drpr and ced-12 in astrocytes results in a delay or modest defect of fragment clearance [19, 20], suggesting that other unknown cells might take over when astrocytes are defective.A second role of glia is to instruct the initiation of axon pruning [21]. While during normal development astrocytes are the primary cells that engulf degenerated axons, inhibiting drpr or both drpr and ced-12 in astrocytes results in a delay or modest defect of fragment clearance [19, 20], suggesting that other unknown cells might take over when astrocytes are defective.A second role of glia is to instruct the initiation of axon pruning [21]. Molecular mechanisms of MB γ neuron pruningAlthough neuron-glia interactions are required for axon pruning, in essence, it is a cell-autonomous process. Molecular mechanisms of MB γ neuron pruningAlthough neuron-glia interactions are required for axon pruning, in essence, it is a cell-autonomous process. TGF-β signaling is initiated by glial secretion of Myo [21] functioning through the type I receptor Baboon (Babo) and either one of the type II receptors Punt or Wishful thinking (Wit) (Figure 3) [23]. How does TGF-β regulate the expression of EcR-B1? How does TGF-β regulate the expression of EcR-B1? MB γ neurons require an intact ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) for axon pruning [14]. Regardless, the substrate(s) that is degraded by the UPS to promote MB axon pruning is not yet known. Regardless, the substrate(s) that is degraded by the UPS to promote MB axon pruning is not yet known. Dendrite-specific pruning of sensory neurons contrasts with pruning of both axons and dendrites in MB γ neurons and other central neurons [5–7]. Cellular mechanisms of dendrite pruning in class IV ddaC neuronsda neurons undergo a stereotyped pruning process mainly involving local degeneration [8]. Phagocytic hemocytes were shown to be involved engulfment and degradation of the dendritic fragments and debris [8], which involves activation of extracellular matrix metalloproteases [9]. Sox14, a HMG domain transcription factor, binds to the mical promoter and induces the expression of Mical, a cytoskeletal regulator (Figure 3) [27]. Ubiquitin-proteasome system and its substrates during dendrite pruningThe UPS cell-autonomously regulates dendrite pruning in ddaC neurons [9], similar to MB axon pruning [14]. Moreover, DIAP1 and caspases are regulated by Valosin-containing protein (VCP) [46]. Inhibition of VCP causes the defects in ddaC dendrite pruning, occurring concomitantly with reduced caspase activity and high DIAP1 levels.Another E3 ligase that has recently been identified for its roles in both ddaC dendrite pruning and MB axon pruning is the Cullin1-based SCF E3 ubiquitin ligase complex (Figure 3) [28]. To achieve this, the F-box protein Slimb, a component of the SCF E3 ligase, associates with Akt, an activator of the InR/PI3K/TOR pathway, resulting in its ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation [28]. Here we will highlight the recent findings involving axon and dendrite pruning in Drosophila and discuss some similarities and differences in the underlying mechanisms. Here we will highlight the recent findings involving axon and dendrite pruning in Drosophila and discuss some similarities and differences in the underlying mechanisms. 