Of these five SNPs, only rs1059276 was statistically significant in CD in our study, and the P-value for the SNP was much lower in CD (3×10−3) than in UC (2×10−7). Of these five SNPs, only rs1059276 was statistically significant in CD in our study, and the P-value for the SNP was much lower in CD (3×10−3) than in UC (2×10−7). Of these five SNPs, only rs1059276 was statistically significant in CD in our study, and the P-value for the SNP was much lower in CD (3×10−3) than in UC (2×10−7). The two earlier genome-wide studies for UC by Fisher et al 31 and Franke et al 32 did not report SNPs at or nearby the MEP1A locus. We cannot exclude the possibility that the MEP1A locus contains causal intronic SNPs linked to the significantly associated exonic SNPs identified in this study. Genetic association of MEP1A with IBDTo identify polymorphisms in the MEP1A gene, all 14 exons were sequenced in 24 patients: 6 patients with UC, 6 with CD (none of whom carried any of the three common CD-associated NOD2/CARD15 variants), and 12 celiac disease patients. The study presented herein is the first to report that the disruption of the meprin-α gene alone affects the severity of IBD. In summary, several lines of evidence, from human genetic studies and the meprin αKO mouse model presented here, associate MEP1A with IBD. The healthy controls were age and sex matched and included 276 subjects randomly chosen from general practitioner clinics around Abingdon, Oxfordshire, UK, and 96 samples from the UK National Blood Transfusion Service. All nine polymorphisms were genotyped in 379 UC and 380 CD patients as well as in 372 healthy controls. Ethics approval was obtained from the Central Oxford Region Ethics Committee (COREC 00.083) and written consent was obtained from all participants.dbSNP (build 129) states a total of 255 SNPs at the MEP1A locus, the large majority of which are intronic. χ2 test was used on allele frequencies data in 2×2 contingency tables. Linkage disequilibrium between genotyped polymorphisms was determined using GOLD.30 Differences between mean expression levels in the patient groups were analyzed statistically using Kruskal–Wallis and Dunn's multiple comparison tests. Differences between mean expression levels in the patient groups were analyzed statistically using Kruskal–Wallis and Dunn's multiple comparison tests. Differences between mean expression levels in the patient groups were analyzed statistically using Kruskal–Wallis and Dunn's multiple comparison tests. Differences between mean expression levels in the patient groups were analyzed statistically using Kruskal–Wallis and Dunn's multiple comparison tests. Differences between mean expression levels in the patient groups were analyzed statistically using Kruskal–Wallis and Dunn's multiple comparison tests. Primers 5′-CAGGTGAGTATGACTCGAGCAGAGTAGG-3′ (containing an XhoI restriction site, corresponding to exon7/intron7 junction) and 5′-GATGAGGCAGCTAGCATACTGGGATTC-3′ (encoding an NheI site and corresponding to intron 8) were used to generate a 4.9-kb amplicon from the 129×1/SvJ genomic DNA (Jackson stock no. Primers 5′-CAGGTGAGTATGACTCGAGCAGAGTAGG-3′ (containing an XhoI restriction site, corresponding to exon7/intron7 junction) and 5′-GATGAGGCAGCTAGCATACTGGGATTC-3′ (encoding an NheI site and corresponding to intron 8) were used to generate a 4.9-kb amplicon from the 129×1/SvJ genomic DNA (Jackson stock no. A pairwise linkage disequilibrium analysis indicated strong linkage disequilibrium across the MEP1A gene (Supplementary Figure S1 online). Electroporation and selection of targeted embryonic stem cells and subsequent blastocyst injections were performed at the University of Michigan Transgenic Animal Facility. Meprin-α primers gave a 164-bp and meprin-β primers gave a 145-bp product (see Supplementary Table S9 online for primers). Sections were probed using anti-meprin-α or -β antibody.21 Digital photographs were taken with a Nikon Eclipse E600 microscope. Ileum brush-border membrane preparationIleal samples were weighed and homogenized in 10 volumes of cold homogenization buffer (50 mm mannitol, 2 mm Tris-Cl, pH 7.0) in the presence of Complete Mini Protease Cocktail Inhibitor (Roche, Indianapolis, IN). CaCl2 was added to a final concentration of 10 mm and the homogenate stirred slowly at 4°C for 15 min. The scores of 2 and 3 were assigned based on the magnitude of weight loss accompanied with loose stool and rectal bleeding. The serum was removed and filtered using a 10,000 MW cutoff microcon (Millipore, Bedford, MA). Colons were homogenized in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium containing 10% fetal bovine serum (0.1 g ml−1). However, the association with UC was also evident considering control allele frequencies given in these databases (P=5×10−5 and < 1×10−8 for Hapmap and dbSNP, respectively). Intensity of the spots was analyzed using the software provided (Quansys Biosciences). Villin-1 displays a similar expression pattern that probably reflects a decrease in the relative number of differentiated epithelial cells in the colon. If the loss of differentiated epithelial cells was the only cause for the decreased expression of meprin-α mRNA, the meprin-α/villin-1 ratio would be expected to remain unchanged in the inflamed samples. However, a significantly decreased ratio of meprin-α to villin-1 mRNA was found in affected mucosa (Figure 2c). Although the meprin-α to villin-1 mean ratio was 0.79 (range, 0.51–1.04) in healthy controls, it was lower in the affected regions to 0.48 (range, 0.11–0.73) in CD and 0.43 (range, 0.13–0.76) in UC groups, respectively, indicating that the expression of meprin-α was affected to a greater extent than of villin-1. Targeted disruption of the Mep1a gene was achieved by inserting a neomycin cassette in exon 7, the segment that codes for the zinc-catalytic center of meprin-α (Figure 3). Targeted disruption of the Mep1a gene was achieved by inserting a neomycin cassette in exon 7, the segment that codes for the zinc-catalytic center of meprin-α (Figure 3). The homozygous meprin αKO mice did not show any overt physical, anatomical, or histological abnormalities (data not shown). The homozygous meprin αKO mice did not show any overt physical, anatomical, or histological abnormalities (data not shown). The litter size of meprin αKO mice was 6.2±0.43, compared with 7.8±0.33 pups per litter for WT mice. The smaller litter size of the αKO is reminiscent of the meprin βKO mice that were under-represented in a heterozygous mating.21 Both meprin-α and -β subunits are expressed in WT mice during embryogenesis; the reduced litter sizes in αKO mice indicate the role of meprins in development.22 It is possible that the αKO mice do not have the same reproductive fitness as WT mice, or that there is maternal rescue in the αKO mice generated from the heterozygous parents.Meprin-α mRNA and protein analysis from several tissues of meprin αKO mice revealed the lack of both, as expected (Supplementary Figure S2 online). Immunohistochemical staining of intestinal tissue detected meprin-α protein in the brush-border membranes of ileal villi of WT but not in meprin αKO mice (Supplementary Figure S2c online).To determine whether the disruption of the Mep1a gene affected meprin-β expression, meprin-β mRNA, protein and activity was assessed in the meprin αKO mice (Supplementary Figure S3 online). Immunohistochemical analysis indicated the presence of membrane-bound meprin-β subunits in the brush-border membrane of the ileum of both genotypes (Supplementary Figure S3b online). Meprin αKO mice were more susceptible to DSS-induced colitisAn experimental model of IBD was produced in mice by administering DSS in drinking water. Meprin αKO mice were more susceptible to DSS-induced colitisAn experimental model of IBD was produced in mice by administering DSS in drinking water. There was an increase in fecal occult blood at 7 days in mice treated with DSS, with meprin αKO mice (mean values, 2.8±0.37) bleeding more than the WT mice (mean values, 2.0±0.22).Disease activity index (DAI) values were calculated as described in the Methods section considering weight loss, stool formation, and rectal bleeding. There was an increase in fecal occult blood at 7 days in mice treated with DSS, with meprin αKO mice (mean values, 2.8±0.37) bleeding more than the WT mice (mean values, 2.0±0.22).Disease activity index (DAI) values were calculated as described in the Methods section considering weight loss, stool formation, and rectal bleeding. The DAI values were greater for the meprin αKO mice than for WT mice from days 4 to 7 (Figure 4c). The DAI values were greater for the meprin αKO mice than for WT mice from days 4 to 7 (Figure 4c). Although the WT sections showed 1.14-fold injury (control, 12.6±1.8; DSS, 14.5±2.3), the fold increase for meprin αKO (control 11.9±1.3; DSS, 21.1±1.1) sections was 1.77. After DSS treatment, increased MPO activity was observed in both WT and meprin αKO mouse colons (P<2×10−5 and P<5×10−5, respectively). Seven cytokines—IL-5, IL-6, IL-10, IL-12, monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1) (CCL2), RANTES (CCL5), and IFN-γ—were significantly elevated in the αKO mice compared with their WT counterparts (P<0.05). The other pro-inflammatory molecules, namely IL-12, MCP-1, and RANTES, showed a two- to threefold increase in WT mice but a four- to fivefold increase in αKO mice (Figure 6b–d). The data presented here strongly implicate MEP1A as an IBD susceptibility gene. Overall, the cytokine data show that meprin αKO mice mount a more robust immune response than WT mice in this model of experimental colitis. Overall, the cytokine data show that meprin αKO mice mount a more robust immune response than WT mice in this model of experimental colitis. Overall, the cytokine data show that meprin αKO mice mount a more robust immune response than WT mice in this model of experimental colitis. The levels in WT DSS-treated mice did not show any significant elevation until day 5, and the increase was modest (10–15 μm). In contrast to the colon cytokines, significant differences between the two genotypes were limited to four cytokines: IL-1β, IL-6, MCP-1, and RANTES. In contrast to the colon cytokines, significant differences between the two genotypes were limited to four cytokines: IL-1β, IL-6, MCP-1, and RANTES. In contrast to the colon cytokines, significant differences between the two genotypes were limited to four cytokines: IL-1β, IL-6, MCP-1, and RANTES. In contrast to the colon cytokines, significant differences between the two genotypes were limited to four cytokines: IL-1β, IL-6, MCP-1, and RANTES. Serum IL-6 levels in the WT mice were approximately fourfold increased after DSS treatment compared with controls, whereas in the αKO mice, levels increased over 16-fold (Figure 7c). 