Osteoblasts are responsible for the production of organic osteoid, which includes both collagen and non-collagenous proteins (NCPs). While collagen makes up approximately 90% of the ECM, NCPs are understood to be key regulators in mineralization.20–22 NCPs undergo posttranslational modifications (i.e. Free energy surfaces (FES) describing the peptide distance to the surface, and radius of gyration were used to characterize surface-bound and solution peptide structure of each system. Free energy surfaces (FES) describing the peptide distance to the surface, and radius of gyration were used to characterize surface-bound and solution peptide structure of each system. Free energy surfaces (FES) describing the peptide distance to the surface, and radius of gyration were used to characterize surface-bound and solution peptide structure of each system. The radius of gyration was reweighted based on solution (distance > 3.0 nm) and surface (distance <= 3.0) distance from the surface, to clearly understand the impact of modification on structure. The free-energy profile for the peptide radius of gyration shows that dOC adopts an extended conformation at the interface, given by the free energy minima at a radius of gyration value of 1.2 nm. The free-energy profile for the peptide radius of gyration shows that dOC adopts an extended conformation at the interface, given by the free energy minima at a radius of gyration value of 1.2 nm. The free-energy profile for the peptide radius of gyration shows that dOC adopts an extended conformation at the interface, given by the free energy minima at a radius of gyration value of 1.2 nm. The free-energy profile for the peptide radius of gyration shows that dOC adopts an extended conformation at the interface, given by the free energy minima at a radius of gyration value of 1.2 nm. The free-energy profile for the peptide radius of gyration shows that dOC adopts an extended conformation at the interface, given by the free energy minima at a radius of gyration value of 1.2 nm. This extended conformation persisted in all 3 of the top structures from clustering the structures at the surface, representing over 50% of the surface bound conformations (Figure S3). This extended conformation persisted in all 3 of the top structures from clustering the structures at the surface, representing over 50% of the surface bound conformations (Figure S3). This extended conformation persisted in all 3 of the top structures from clustering the structures at the surface, representing over 50% of the surface bound conformations (Figure S3). This extended conformation persisted in all 3 of the top structures from clustering the structures at the surface, representing over 50% of the surface bound conformations (Figure S3). In the surface adsorbed structure of OC, a kinked tight helix with two turns appears in two of the top clusters, representing 79% of all adsorbed conformations. In the surface adsorbed structure of OC, a kinked tight helix with two turns appears in two of the top clusters, representing 79% of all adsorbed conformations. In the surface adsorbed structure of OC, a kinked tight helix with two turns appears in two of the top clusters, representing 79% of all adsorbed conformations. In the surface adsorbed structure of OC, a kinked tight helix with two turns appears in two of the top clusters, representing 79% of all adsorbed conformations. In the surface adsorbed structure of OC, a kinked tight helix with two turns appears in two of the top clusters, representing 79% of all adsorbed conformations. The reweighted FES for dOC on HA shows that the adsorbed peptide has an average of 1 O-H interaction, and 2 O-Ca1+5 interactions with Glu (Figure S10) indicating the extended surface adsorption is a function of many residues on dOC interacting with the surface. As shown in Figure 7 dOC is extended at the surface, and this persists in all of the top clusters, as shown in Figure S3. As shown in Figure 7 dOC is extended at the surface, and this persists in all of the top clusters, as shown in Figure S3. As shown in Figure 7 dOC is extended at the surface, and this persists in all of the top clusters, as shown in Figure S3. This is attributed to differences in the crystalline structure of the two surfaces, which do not contain bound calcium ions, and the alternate modes by which the peptide interacts with the surface.It is important to note that while we can predict that the Ca1.5+ interactions could be underestimating the energetic impact on structure especially in solution, we see the same conformational trends in solution (albeit to a lesser degree in the case of the Ca1.5+ containing system) independent of the charge on calcium used; dOC shows little structural preference in solution whereas OC adopts a significantly compact conformation in solution (Figure S6). This minimum energy binding pose, and high affinity to interact with calcium, explains the over tenfold reduction in binding energy that was reported in Figure 5. This minimum energy binding pose, and high affinity to interact with calcium, explains the over tenfold reduction in binding energy that was reported in Figure 5. This minimum energy binding pose, and high affinity to interact with calcium, explains the over tenfold reduction in binding energy that was reported in Figure 5. OC adsorption experienced less of an entropic penalty, compared to dOC in both systems. OC adsorption experienced less of an entropic penalty, compared to dOC in both systems. In addition to configurational entropy, previous work on peptide adsorption50,56,79 report that the entropic gains from tightly bound water layers can often be used to explain the driving forces behind peptide binding affinities on metal oxides and strongly hydrophobic surfaces. Rather, work in this area has focused on macroscopically characterizing osteoblast affinity and function.36–38 These results, and lack of detail describing the mechanisms that govern these interactions in the literature have inspired additional molecular dynamics (MD) work in this area with the goal of gaining a more microscopic understanding of the behavior of NCPs at mineral and implant interfaces. This paper presents a comprehensive study of the behavior of the first domain of Osteocalcin interacting with different model surfaces. In both systems, the modification increased overall binding to the surface, however we observe disparities in the binding mechanisms which can be attributed to differences in the behavior of water and ions on each surface. We predict that a fully helical structure of α−1, which was not captured in these simulations, may be partially dependent on adsorption and stability of the α−2 helix, which was also previously predicted to bind to HA experimentally.35 A single disulfide bond between the α−1 and α−2 helices would provide a significant amount of stability to the N-termini that was seen to be flexible and random coil in all simulations, prompting further investigation by simulation into more complex systems. These studies have been limited in scope, generally focused on understanding the effects of a common post translational modification phosphorylation39–41, collagen protein42, and another NCP43. This environment surrounding titania resulted in mechanistically different adsorption when compared to HA. This environment surrounding titania resulted in mechanistically different adsorption when compared to HA. This environment surrounding titania resulted in mechanistically different adsorption when compared to HA. These studies motivate using enhanced sampling MD to uncover molecular design rules, a protocol that has shown success in capturing both thermodynamic and structural fingerprints for large peptide-surface systems. These studies motivate using enhanced sampling MD to uncover molecular design rules, a protocol that has shown success in capturing both thermodynamic and structural fingerprints for large peptide-surface systems. These studies motivate using enhanced sampling MD to uncover molecular design rules, a protocol that has shown success in capturing both thermodynamic and structural fingerprints for large peptide-surface systems. A deeper understanding of these mechanisms, and the variables that influence them will guide the rational design of new implant coatings. A deeper understanding of these mechanisms, and the variables that influence them will guide the rational design of new implant coatings. Our approach applied MD simulations and the enhanced sampling method Parallel Tempering Metadynamics in the Well-Tempered Ensemble (PTMetaD-WTE) to extract energetic and structural information of the α−1 domain of carboxylated osteocalcin (OC) and the fully decarboxylated α−1 domain (dOC) adsorbed onto model basal HA (001) and neutral hydroxylated rutile (110) TiO2 surfaces at physiologically relevant pH. This ratio of phosphate groups is a close approximation of the chemistry at pH 7 (70%/30%). This is particularly important for the goal of optimizing the molecular scale design of new materials for implant coatings. This is particularly important for the goal of optimizing the molecular scale design of new materials for implant coatings. Following this, the HA surface (7.6 nm × 6.6 nm × 11.0 nm) was solvated with an average of 12,100 water molecules and the TiO2 surface (5.4 nm × 5.2 nm × 10.7 nm) was solvated with 8,200 water molecules. Following this, the HA surface (7.6 nm × 6.6 nm × 11.0 nm) was solvated with an average of 12,100 water molecules and the TiO2 surface (5.4 nm × 5.2 nm × 10.7 nm) was solvated with 8,200 water molecules. Following this, the HA surface (7.6 nm × 6.6 nm × 11.0 nm) was solvated with an average of 12,100 water molecules and the TiO2 surface (5.4 nm × 5.2 nm × 10.7 nm) was solvated with 8,200 water molecules. The systems were then equilibrated to standard temperature and pressure, over 1 ns total, using a stochastic global thermostat72 to couple temperature (tau=0.1 ps) and semi-isotropic pressure scaling using the Parrinello-Rahman barostat73 (tau=10 ps) with x/y and z compressibility set to 4.5×10−15 bar−1, and 4.5×10−5 bar-1. A 1 ns NVT simulation was then used to generate starting configurations for the enhanced sampling production runs, which were also carried out in the NVT ensemble. This temperature range has been previously used for biasing large peptides with hidden free energy barriers that are otherwise difficult to sample in the MetaD scheme alone75. This temperature range has been previously used for biasing large peptides with hidden free energy barriers that are otherwise difficult to sample in the MetaD scheme alone75. The potential energy was then biased with metadynamics for 10ns, to establish the well-tempered ensemble76,77 The potential energy was biased using an initial hill height of 2 kJ/mol, a bias factor of 10, and 1hill/1ps hill deposition rate, attempting replica exchange at the same pace. These CVs were biased using sigma values of 0.2nm, and 0.1nm, respectively, an initial hill height of 2 kJ/mol, a bias factor of 10, and 1hill/1ps hill deposition rate in the 2D MetaD biasing scheme. Systems were equilibrated using the same criteria as described above. To assess simulation convergence of all enhanced sampling simulations, free energy as a function of the biased CV was monitored over time. Binding free energies were calculated using a Boltzmann averaged difference of the Helmholtz free energy between the surface adsorbed and solution states. Binding free energies were calculated using a Boltzmann averaged difference of the Helmholtz free energy between the surface adsorbed and solution states. We began our investigation profiling the water density for the two surfaces (Figure 2), which match prior reported water densities.49,60 These water densities are calculated from the nearest frozen heavy atom layer, for each surface respectively. We began our investigation profiling the water density for the two surfaces (Figure 2), which match prior reported water densities.49,60 These water densities are calculated from the nearest frozen heavy atom layer, for each surface respectively. We began our investigation profiling the water density for the two surfaces (Figure 2), which match prior reported water densities.49,60 These water densities are calculated from the nearest frozen heavy atom layer, for each surface respectively. The free energy profiles (FEP) from the biased CVs are included in Figure S2. 