By contrast with ob/ob animals, however, TORC1 mutant mice are only moderately obese, potentially reflecting compensatory effects of other TORC family members. By contrast with ob/ob animals, however, TORC1 mutant mice are only moderately obese, potentially reflecting compensatory effects of other TORC family members. By contrast with ob/ob animals, however, TORC1 mutant mice are only moderately obese, potentially reflecting compensatory effects of other TORC family members. By contrast with ob/ob animals, however, TORC1 mutant mice are only moderately obese, potentially reflecting compensatory effects of other TORC family members. By contrast with ob/ob animals, however, TORC1 mutant mice are only moderately obese, potentially reflecting compensatory effects of other TORC family members. By contrast with ob/ob animals, however, TORC1 mutant mice are only moderately obese, potentially reflecting compensatory effects of other TORC family members. Drosophila TORC and mammalian TORC1 are regulated through phosphorylation by Salt Inducible Kinases (SIKs) and other members of the AMPK family 10,15,39. Drosophila TORC and mammalian TORC1 are regulated through phosphorylation by Salt Inducible Kinases (SIKs) and other members of the AMPK family 10,15,39. Drosophila TORC and mammalian TORC1 are regulated through phosphorylation by Salt Inducible Kinases (SIKs) and other members of the AMPK family 10,15,39. Future epidemiological studies of TORC1 gene mutations in affected populations should provide further insight in this regard. The wild-type allele was amplified using primers A and C (5′-ATTCCTCATATACCTCTCTTCTGGTGC-3′). The mutant allele was amplified using primers A and D (5′-GCATGAATCAACTTTGGAGACATGCG-3′). Locomotor activity, oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide production were simultaneously measured with a Comprehensive Lab Animal Monitoring System (Columbus), as previously described 44. Saline, leptin (2μg/g), and MTII (2μg/g) were administered by intraperitoneal injection 30 min prior to the onset of the dark cycle. Saline, leptin (2μg/g), and MTII (2μg/g) were administered by intraperitoneal injection 30 min prior to the onset of the dark cycle. Blood and Plasma MeasurementsFor whole blood and plasma measurements, mouse blood was collected from the tail vein into EDTA-coated capillary tubes (StatSpin). For serum measurements, blood was collected by cardiac puncture from anesthetized (350 mg/kg chloral hydrate, i.p.) Serum levels of luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone were determined at the University of Virginia Center for Research in Reproduction Ligand Assay and Analysis Core. Blood glucose levels were determined prior to the test and at 15, 30, 60, and 120 min following the injection. Subcutaneous InfusionOsmotic minipumps (0.25μL/h, Alzet) were aseptically filled with 0.45 μm-filtered sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) or leptin (1.2mg/mL). Subcutaneous InfusionOsmotic minipumps (0.25μL/h, Alzet) were aseptically filled with 0.45 μm-filtered sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) or leptin (1.2mg/mL). Subcutaneous InfusionOsmotic minipumps (0.25μL/h, Alzet) were aseptically filled with 0.45 μm-filtered sterile phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) or leptin (1.2mg/mL). Minipumps were primed by incubation at 37°C in sterile 0.9% saline for 8 to 16h. Body weight and food intake were measured daily for 10 days, starting after the implantation of the minipumps. Colchicine was injected over a 15min period through the cannula using a hamilton syringe. Mice were anesthetized and transcardially perfused for brain immunohistochemistry 36h after colchicine treatment. The EVX-1 luciferase reporter and TORC1 expression constructs have been described previously 8. Immunohistochemistry and ImmunofluorescenceMice were anesthetized (350 mg/kg chloral hydrate, i.p.) Brains were post-fixed for 2h at 4°C and then incubated in 0.05 M potassium-PBS (K-PBS) containing 15% (w/v) sucrose 4°C for 12–16 hr. Sections were incubated overnight at 4°C with primary antibody diluted in blocking solution. The primary antibodies used were P-STAT3 Y705 (1:1000, #9145, Cell Signaling Technologies), KISS1 (1:1000, #9754, Chemicon), CART (1:10000, #6838, PBL-Salk Institute), and TORC1 (1:2500, #6938, PBL-Salk Institute). In Situ HybridizationMethods for probe synthesis, hybridization and autoradiography as described previously 46. The partial β-Gal cDNA was PCR amplified and cloned from the gene-trap cassette isolated from TORC1 −/− mice. Brain sections were mounted onto poly-L-lysine coated slides, dried under vacuum, and postfixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 min at 4°C. Tissue sections were digested with proteinase K (10μg/mL) for 30 min at 37°C, acetylated and dehydrated prior to hybridization. Labeled probes (1–3×109 dpm/μg) were diluted in hybridization solution, applied to sections and allowed to hybridize overnight at 60°C. Sections were subsequently treated with ribonuclease A (20μg/ml) for 30 min at 37°C, washed with 0.1× SSC buffer (65–85°C), dehydrated and exposed to x-ray films (β-max; Eastman Kodak) for 1–2 d. Slides were then coated with Kodak NTB-2 liquid emulsion, and exposed at 4°C for 3–4 weeks. Cell Culture, Transfections and Luciferase AssaysThe mouse hypothalamic cell line GT1-7 was a gift from Dr. Pam Mellon (UCSD). GT1-7 cells, 293T cells and GH3 cells were cultured in DMEM (Mediatech) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (HyClone), 100 μg/ml penicillin-streptomycin and 1mM pyruvate. GT1-7 cells, 293T cells and GH3 cells were cultured in DMEM (Mediatech) containing 10% fetal bovine serum (HyClone), 100 μg/ml penicillin-streptomycin and 1mM pyruvate. Cell lysates were prepared and the activities of luciferase and β-galactosidase were determined, as described previously 8. Brain Region DissectionsHypothalamic tissue was dissected as described previously 46 with a slight modification. The brain was sliced coronally with a razor blade to generate a block spanning from the optic chiasm to the rostral end of the mammillary bodies. These cuts also generated two amygdala-enriched regions, lateral to the hypothalamus, and a cortex-enriched region dorsal to the external capsule. TORC1 contains conserved phosphorylation (Ser151) and ubiquitination (Lys575) sites that have been shown to modulate nuclear shuttling and protein stability in TORC2 13–15 (fig. For tissue, animals were anesthetized (350 μg/kg chloral hydrate, i.p.) and the relevant tissue or brain region was rapidly dissected out and snap-frozen in liquid N2 or immersed in RNA later for 12 to 16h at 4°C. Gene-profiling experiments were conducted with an Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 array and analyzed, as described previously 49. Gene-profiling experiments were conducted with an Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 array and analyzed, as described previously 49. For animal experiments, hypothalamic tissue was dissected from mice after the indicated manipulations. Chromatin was prepared and immunoprecipitations performed, as described previously 49. Following crosslink reversal, and proteinase K treatment, DNA was isolated by two rounds of phenol-chloroform extractions and ethanol precipitation. Western blots for TORC1, TORC2, CREB and P-CREB Ser133 were performed using antibodies 6939E1, 6865, 244, 5322, respectively (Salk Institute). Five to eight matched arcuate-containing sections from whole-brain series were counted from independent experiments. Taken together, these results indicate that the effects of TORC1 on body weight are specific to white adipose, affect both males and females, and vary with gene dosage. IP leptin injection increased amounts of dephosphorylated, nuclear TORC1 protein in arcuate cells of ob/ob mice (fig. IP leptin injection increased amounts of dephosphorylated, nuclear TORC1 protein in arcuate cells of ob/ob mice (fig. IP leptin injection increased amounts of dephosphorylated, nuclear TORC1 protein in arcuate cells of ob/ob mice (fig. IP leptin injection increased amounts of dephosphorylated, nuclear TORC1 protein in arcuate cells of ob/ob mice (fig. Consistent with a parallel role for nutrient signaling, IP glucose administration also promoted the accumulation of dephosphorylated TORC1 in the hypothalamus (sup fig. Importantly, TORC1 driven β-gal mRNA was co-expressed with CART and KISS1 neuropeptides in arcuate cells by dual immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization (fig. Importantly, TORC1 driven β-gal mRNA was co-expressed with CART and KISS1 neuropeptides in arcuate cells by dual immunohistochemistry and in situ hybridization (fig. 