Fractions containing protein were pooled and desalted into column buffer (25 mM HEPES, pH 7.5, 50 mM KCl, 10% glycerol) using a PD-10 column (GE Healthcare). AssaysAssays were performed at 30 °C in a buffer containing 25 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 100 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 0.05% TWEEN-20 (EMD Millipore), supplemented as necessary with ATP (Sigma-Aldrich), ATPγS (Roche), or ADP (Sigma-Aldrich). AssaysAssays were performed at 30 °C in a buffer containing 25 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 100 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 0.05% TWEEN-20 (EMD Millipore), supplemented as necessary with ATP (Sigma-Aldrich), ATPγS (Roche), or ADP (Sigma-Aldrich). AssaysAssays were performed at 30 °C in a buffer containing 25 mM HEPES (pH 7.5), 100 mM KCl, 10 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 0.05% TWEEN-20 (EMD Millipore), supplemented as necessary with ATP (Sigma-Aldrich), ATPγS (Roche), or ADP (Sigma-Aldrich). Trajectories were initially fit to a single-exponential function and were subsequently truncated to ~6 half-lives based on the estimated rate constant. Trajectories were initially fit to a single-exponential function and were subsequently truncated to ~6 half-lives based on the estimated rate constant. Trajectories were initially fit to a single-exponential function and were subsequently truncated to ~6 half-lives based on the estimated rate constant. Trajectories were initially fit to a single-exponential function and were subsequently truncated to ~6 half-lives based on the estimated rate constant. In this experiment, ClpP binding to sc6ClpXΔN-bio saturated after ~30 s, but no dissociation was observed over several minutes. Alternatively, ClpP-binding and non-binding subpopulations of ClpX hexamers may equilibrate, with the binding conformation having slightly weaker affinity for ATP. This model seems less likely, as KM for ATP hydrolysis by sc6ClpXΔN-bio in the presence of excess ClpP was 29 μM (Vmax = 41 min−1 enz−1; n = 2.2), in agreement with studies showing that ClpP reduces KM for wild-type ClpX.4We measured kobs values for association of 200 nM ClpP in different concentrations of ATP and ADP that totaled 2 mM (Figure 3b). Nucleotide dependence of dissociationTo test if ClpXP complexes require the continued presence of nucleotide, we bound ClpP to immobilized sc6ClpXΔN-bio in the presence of ATP and transferred the biosensor into ClpP-free buffer containing ADP, ATP, or ATPγS. ClpXP complexes dissociated with a half-life of ~5 s in the presence of ADP but remained stable in ATP or ATPγS (Figure 4a). ClpXP complexes dissociated with a half-life of ~5 s in the presence of ADP but remained stable in ATP or ATPγS (Figure 4a). By contrast, ATPγS-stabilized ClpXP was more stable in nucleotide-free buffer (Figure 4c) than in buffer containing ADP (Figure 4b), suggesting that ADP binding to unoccupied ClpX subunits stimulates ATPγS hydrolysis or release.These results show that ClpX-bound ATP or ATPγS that leaves by dissociation or hydrolysis must be replaced to maintain stable ClpXP complexes. This result is consistent with experiments that show that different subunits in the ClpX hexamer bind ATP with a range of affinities.8 ClpXP complexes transferred into buffer with a 7:1 mixture of ADP:ATP (2 mM total) were ~100-fold more kinetically stable than those transferred into ADP alone (Figure 4e), suggesting that complexes containing a mixture of ADP-bound and ATP-bound ClpX subunits are quite stable.In ClpP-free buffer containing 2 mM ATP, little dissociation of ClpXP complexes was observed over 1000 s when the biosensor was washed twice with fresh buffer, moved into buffer containing non-biotinylated sc6ClpXΔN to prevent rebinding of dissociated ClpP, or transferred into buffer containing the GFP-ssrA substrate (Figure 4f). Substantially longer BLI experiments were not possible because of sample evaporation. Substantially longer BLI experiments were not possible because of sample evaporation. ADEP-induced dissociationADEPs bind to the same ClpP clefts as the IGF loops of ClpX.19–21 Notably, even in the presence of ATP, addition of 50 μM ADEP-2B caused extremely rapid dissociation of ClpXP complexes (Figure 5a), ruling out a strictly competitive model in which ADEPs simply prevent ClpX rebinding following spontaneous dissociation. For example, unlinked ClpXP might be less kinetically stable because of ClpX hexamer dissociation, or association might be strictly second-order if ClpX was not surface bound. For example, unlinked ClpXP might be less kinetically stable because of ClpX hexamer dissociation, or association might be strictly second-order if ClpX was not surface bound. Most stabilization of ClpXP complexes arises from contacts between hydrophobic clefts on the periphery of the heptameric ClpP ring and flexible loops in the ClpX hexamer that contain an IGF or related tripeptide sequence (Figure 1a,b).5,16–18 Contacts between axial pore-2 loops in ClpX and stem-loop structures in ClpP also contribute to ClpXP stability,16 but elimination of these axial interactions impairs binding less than deletion of a single IGF loop from the ClpX hexamer.16 Interestingly, small-molecule acyldepsipeptides, such as ADEP-2B, also bind to the ClpP clefts, mimicking IGF-loop binding (Figure 1c).19–21 ADEPs have antibacterial activity because they open the axial ClpP pore, causing indiscriminate degradation of unstructured proteins.22–23 Moreover, the concentration dependence of ADEP-2B-induced ClpXP dissociation suggests that binding of a single ADEP to the ClpXP complex is sufficient to drive dissociation. Moreover, the concentration dependence of ADEP-2B-induced ClpXP dissociation suggests that binding of a single ADEP to the ClpXP complex is sufficient to drive dissociation. However, based on differences in affinity, the free energy of ClpP binding by our single-chain ClpX hexamer is far more favorable than ADEP-2B binding.28 Thus, it is unlikely that one ADEP-binding event would be thermodynamically capable of driving the ClpXP complex into a conformation that forces rapid ClpX dissociation.Our results support a “dynamic competition” model in which one ClpX IGF loop transiently unbinds a ClpP cleft, allowing an ADEP to bind and accelerate dissociation by preventing rebinding of the undocked loop (Figure 6b). Additional mechanistic implicationsIGF-loop flexibility was initially proposed to allow ClpXP docking despite the symmetry mismatch between six loops in the ClpX hexamer and seven clefts in a ClpP ring.17 Consistent with some flexibility, the IGF loops are proteolytically accessible in free ClpX and disordered in crystal structures of ClpX ring hexamers.7,18,29 If these loops are truly flexible, however, then why is ATP or ATPγS required for detectable binding of ClpX to ClpP? AAA+ proteolytic machinesThe proteolytic complexes of other AAA+ proteases – including ClpAP, ClpCP, HslUV, Cdc48•20S, PAN•20S, Mpa•20S, and the 26S proteasome – are also stabilized in an ATP-dependent fashion by contacts between peripheral peptide or loop elements from each subunit of a AAA+ unfolding ring and clefts or grooves on the corresponding self-compartmentalized peptidase ring.35 Except for HslUV, the assembly of all of these machines also involve a symmetry mismatch between a hexameric AAA+ unfolding ring and a heptameric protease ring. All AAA+ proteolytic machines must cycle through a variety of nucleotide-dependent conformations as they mechanically unfold and translocate protein substrates. As a consequence, we suspect that the interactions that stabilize these proteolytic machines will also be highly dynamic and influence their mechanisms of assembly and disassembly. 