M0530L) containing:HF bufferForward PCR primer: AATGATACGGCGACCACCGABarcoded reverse PCR primers (XXXXXX Indicates unique barcodes):CAAGCAGAAGACGGCATACGAGATXXXXXXGTGACTGGAGTTCCTTGGCACCCGAGAATTCCA6× DNA loading dye (see recipe)Thermal cycler200-μl PCR tubesThermomixer (Eppendorf)1.5-ml microcentrifuge tubesMicrocentrifugeGel electrophoresis equipmentRocker platformUV-transilluminatorAdditional reagents for the adenylation of oligonucleotides (unit 26.4), extracting RNA from the gel slices (Support Protocol 3), precipitating with GlycoBlue (Support Protocol 1), and denaturing and nondentauring polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) (unit 2.12). To ~2 μg of poly(A)+ RNA or ~25 μg of total RNA in PCR tubes add H2O to a final volume of 54 μl, and then add 6 μl of 100 mM ZnCl2.Incubate the fragmentation reactions at 94°C in a thermal cycler for 55 sec for poly(A)+ RNA or 5 min for total RNA.Quench fragmentation reaction by placing on ice, and quickly adding 60 μl of 40 mM EDTA.Precipitate the fragmentation reaction as described in Support Protocol 1. Incubate for 3 min at 80°C in a thermal cycler and then quickly place on ice. Incubate for 3 min at 80°C in a thermal cycler and then quickly place on ice. The bromophenol blue dye front will run off of the gel.Disassemble the gel, and stain in 15 ml of 1:10,000 SYBR Gold in 0.5× TBE for 5 min at room temperature with gentle rocking.Visualize the gel on a UV-transilluminator and photograph.Excise the gel-slices corresponding to several size ranges for each sample using a clean razor blade, and transfer each gel slice to a clean 1.5-ml microcentrifuge tube. It is very important that the RT primer be gel-purified to ensure that it is a uniform length, allowing robust separation of truncated from full-length cDNAs. It is very important that the RT primer be gel-purified to ensure that it is a uniform length, allowing robust separation of truncated from full-length cDNAs. In a thermal cycler incubate at 65°C for 4 min, followed by 55°C for 2 min, 45°C for 2 min, and 42°C for 2 min. Excised cDNAs should contain at least 25 nt added to the primer. Excised cDNAs should contain at least 25 nt added to the primer. Excised cDNAs should contain at least 25 nt added to the primer. Shorter products contain non-specific stops. Per library:15 μl HF buffer1.5 μl 10 mM dNTPs3.78 μl 10 μM forward PCR primer3.78 μl 10 μM barcoded reverse PCR primers52.6 μl H2O0.75 μl Phusion. Remove tubes successively after the extension phase of cycles 12, 14, 16, and 18, placing tubes on ice.1 cycle: 30 sec 98°C (initial denaturation)18 cycles: 10 sec 98°C (denaturation)20 sec 60°C (annealing)40 sec 72°C (extension).Add 3.4 μl of 6× DNA loading dye to the reactions.Prepare 10-bp ladder by mixing 1 μl of 10-bp ladder, 15.7 μl H2O, and 3.3 μl 6× DNA loading dye.Prepare an 8% TBE- Polyacrylamide mini-gel (see unit 2.12).Load the sample and run for 40 min at 200 V.Disassemble the gel, and stain in 15 ml of 1:10,000 SYBR Gold in 0.5× TBE for 5 min at room temperature with gentle rocking.Visualize the gel on a UV-transilluminator and photograph.Excise the insert containing PCR bands (Fig. cerevisiae Splice Junctions: A TopHat readable file of splice junctions (a description of these files can be found in the TopHat documentation)S. cerevisiae Transcript Annotations: Feature annotations in GFF format can be obtained from http://yeastgenome.org, and UTR boundaries can be found from published work (e.g., Xu et al , 2009; Arribere and Gilbert, 2013).Python: A powerful programming language that can be used for analysis of Pseudo-Seq data (installation instructions can be found at http://python.org; other programming languages may be substituted for Python)Cutadapt: A package for trimming adapter sequences from next-generation sequencing data (documentation can be found at https://code.google.com/p/cutadapt/)Bowtie2: A package for aligning sequencing reads to a reference genome (documentation can be found at http://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net/bowtie2/index.shtml)TopHat: A package for mapping RNA-seq reads to splice-junctions; note that TopHat is dependent on Bowtie and SAMtools (documentation can be found at http://ccb.jhu.edu/software/tophat/index.shtml)SAMtools: A set of utilities for the manipulation of genome alignments in SAM format (documentation can be found at http://samtools.sourceforge.net/) cerevisiae Splice Junctions: A TopHat readable file of splice junctions (a description of these files can be found in the TopHat documentation)S. cerevisiae Transcript Annotations: Feature annotations in GFF format can be obtained from http://yeastgenome.org, and UTR boundaries can be found from published work (e.g., Xu et al , 2009; Arribere and Gilbert, 2013).Python: A powerful programming language that can be used for analysis of Pseudo-Seq data (installation instructions can be found at http://python.org; other programming languages may be substituted for Python)Cutadapt: A package for trimming adapter sequences from next-generation sequencing data (documentation can be found at https://code.google.com/p/cutadapt/)Bowtie2: A package for aligning sequencing reads to a reference genome (documentation can be found at http://bowtie-bio.sourceforge.net/bowtie2/index.shtml)TopHat: A package for mapping RNA-seq reads to splice-junctions; note that TopHat is dependent on Bowtie and SAMtools (documentation can be found at http://ccb.jhu.edu/software/tophat/index.shtml)SAMtools: A set of utilities for the manipulation of genome alignments in SAM format (documentation can be found at http://samtools.sourceforge.net/) The first line begins with @, and contains the name of the read. Reads that cannot be assigned to an index used should be stored in a file for unmapped barcodes. This file should be renamed with an informative, unique file name.Use SAMtools to read the accepted_hits.bam file for each library, and use a custom script to assign the mapped read 5′ ends, which correspond to the cDNA 3′ ends, to their corresponding genomic positions. The genome can then be split into transcribed units.Determine the total number of mappable reads in the library, the total number of reads mapping to rRNA, and the total number of reads mapping to coding sequences using a custom script. SAMPLE PREPARATION AND RNA ISOLATION SAMPLE PREPARATION AND RNA ISOLATION SAMPLE PREPARATION AND RNA ISOLATION SAMPLE PREPARATION AND RNA ISOLATION SAMPLE PREPARATION AND RNA ISOLATION SAMPLE PREPARATION AND RNA ISOLATION Use deionized, distilled water in all recipes and protocol steps. Use deionized, distilled water in all recipes and protocol steps. Use deionized, distilled water in all recipes and protocol steps. Use deionized, distilled water in all recipes and protocol steps. Use deionized, distilled water in all recipes and protocol steps. Until recently, only three were known to occur in mRNAs, m6A, m5C, and inosine. Until recently, only three were known to occur in mRNAs, m6A, m5C, and inosine. Early mapping of Ψ residues used a painstaking combination of procedures including RNase digestion, column chromatography, paper electrophoresis, and paper chromatography. Subsequent studies used a similar set of techniques to map Ψ positions in rRNA (Choi and Busch, 1978; Gupta and Randerath, 1979; Tanaka et al , 1980).A breakthrough in the ability to map Ψ residues with single nucleotide resolution was introduced by Bakin and Ofengad in 1993 (Bakin and Ofengand, 1993). Ligation of a 3′ adapter provides a uniform primer binding site for reverse transcription, replacing gene specific primers. Second is the addition of a selection for truncated cDNAs, which should be enriched in CMC dependent stops at Ψ residues.The ability of next-generation sequencing to provide transcriptome wide data provides Pseudo-seq with several advantages over the classic primer extension assay used for Ψ mapping. However, Pseudo-seq can be used to identify Ψs in all transcripts, Second, next-generation sequencing provides sufficient coverage for Ψ identification in transcripts of a range of abundances. Critical ParametersThe Pseudo-seq library preparation protocol is robust. Critical ParametersThe Pseudo-seq library preparation protocol is robust. Critical ParametersThe Pseudo-seq library preparation protocol is robust. Critical ParametersThe Pseudo-seq library preparation protocol is robust. Critical ParametersThe Pseudo-seq library preparation protocol is robust. Critical ParametersThe Pseudo-seq library preparation protocol is robust. Critical ParametersThe Pseudo-seq library preparation protocol is robust. Pseudouridine, the C5-glycoside isomer of uridine, is the most abundant post-transcriptional modification found within cellular RNAs owing to its presence at multiple positions in both rRNAs and tRNAs (Ge and Yu, 2013) (Fig. The extent of biological replication is also critical, as the use of replicate data allows for false positives to be efficiently filtered from transcripts of lower abundance. It should be noted that strains deleted for pseudouridylation factors can be used as biological replicates alongside wild-type replicates.The parameters used for Ψ calling during data analysis are also important. Use fresh CMC, or increase the CMC concentration used. Reduce the concentration of CMC used, or reduce the treatment time. Make fresh sodium carbonate buffer, and ensure the pH is 10.4, or increase the incubation time during the reversal step. Make fresh sodium carbonate buffer, and ensure the pH is 10.4, or increase the incubation time during the reversal step. Make fresh sodium carbonate buffer, and ensure the pH is 10.4, or increase the incubation time during the reversal step. Yeast growthInoculate 10 ml of YPAD with a single yeast colony, and grow overnight with shaking at 30°C to a target OD600 ~ 7.0.Dilute the overnight culture to OD600 = 0.05 in 750 ml prewarmed YPAD, and grow in a 2-liter baffled flask at 30°C with shaking at 200 rpm to OD600 = 1.0.Harvest the cells by centrifuging for 5 min at ~16,000 × g, 4°C, and decant the supernatant.Resuspend the cell pellet in 25 ml ice-cold deionized distilled H2O, transfer into a clean 50-ml conical tube, centrifuge the cells for 5 min at ~3400 × g, 4°C, in a benchtop centrifuge, decant the supernatant, and then remove the residual wash with a pipet. Yeast growthInoculate 10 ml of YPAD with a single yeast colony, and grow overnight with shaking at 30°C to a target OD600 ~ 7.0.Dilute the overnight culture to OD600 = 0.05 in 750 ml prewarmed YPAD, and grow in a 2-liter baffled flask at 30°C with shaking at 200 rpm to OD600 = 1.0.Harvest the cells by centrifuging for 5 min at ~16,000 × g, 4°C, and decant the supernatant.Resuspend the cell pellet in 25 ml ice-cold deionized distilled H2O, transfer into a clean 50-ml conical tube, centrifuge the cells for 5 min at ~3400 × g, 4°C, in a benchtop centrifuge, decant the supernatant, and then remove the residual wash with a pipet. Usually two to three extractions are sufficient. However, beads can be prepared in batch for all samples (steps 16 to 19).Pellet the beads by centrifuging for <1 min at 3000 × g, room temperature, in a benchtop centrifuge, and gently remove the supernatant by decanting.Wash the beads three times, each time with 3 ml H2O, centrifuging and removing supernatants as in step 17. Then transfer RNA to the oligo(dT) cellulose bead pellet, vortex briefly, and incubate on a rotating rack for 15 min at room temperature.Pellet the beads by centrifuging for <1 min at 3000 × g, room temperature, in a benchtop centrifuge. This step re-denatures the unbound RNA in the supernatant to enhance poly(A) RNA binding to beads in the subsequent incubation step.Return the RNA to the beads, vortex briefly, and incubate on a rotating rack for 15 min at room temperature. This second incubation with oligo(dT) cellulose increases recovery of poly(A) RNA.Pellet the beads, and discard the supernatant as in step 17.Wash the beads three times, each time with 5 ml TES + NaCl buffer. This second incubation with oligo(dT) cellulose increases recovery of poly(A) RNA.Pellet the beads, and discard the supernatant as in step 17.Wash the beads three times, each time with 5 ml TES + NaCl buffer. Recent work has revealed dynamic regulation of pseudouridylation in response to cellular stressors, suggesting regulatory potential for pseudouridylation(Wu et al , 2011; Carlile et al , 2014; Courtes et al , 2014; Lovejoy et al , 2014; Schwartz et al , 2014) Although the molecular and cellular functions of endogenous mRNA pseudouridylation are not yet known, artificially targeted pseudouridylation of stop codons promotes non-canonical base-pairing of Ψ in the ribosomal decoding center leading to efficient nonsense suppression (Karijolich and Yu, 2011; Fernández et al , 2013). Vortex briefly, pellet the beads, and discard the supernatant as in step 17. It is advisable to do no more than 4 samples at once.Add 2 ml 55°C H2O to the bead pellet, and incubate in a 55°C water bath for 5 min. It is advisable to do no more than 4 samples at once.Add 2 ml 55°C H2O to the bead pellet, and incubate in a 55°C water bath for 5 min. It is advisable to do no more than 4 samples at once.Add 2 ml 55°C H2O to the bead pellet, and incubate in a 55°C water bath for 5 min. Pellet the beads as in step 17, and transfer the supernatant to a clean 15 ml conical tube.Repeat step 28 once more, and pool the eluates. Pellet the beads as in step 17, and transfer the supernatant to a clean 15 ml conical tube.Repeat step 28 once more, and pool the eluates. Transfer the supernatant to the original 15-ml conical tube, incubate in a 65°C water bath for 5 min, and place on ice for 2 min.Return the RNA to the beads, vortex briefly, and incubate on a rotating rack for 15 min at room temperature.Wash the beads three times with TES + NaCl buffer as in step 26.Wash the beads once with ice-cold water as in step 27.Elute poly(A)+ RNA twice with 1.8 ml 55°C H2O as in steps 28 to 29, pooling the eluates.Pass the eluates through a cellulose acetate filter with a syringe, and distribute the filtrate across four 2-ml microcentrifuge tubes. This step removes any residual beads from the eluates.Isopropanol precipitate the poly(A)+ RNA with GlycoBlue as described in Support Protocol 1.Resuspend each pellet in 6 μl H2O, and combine the RNA into one 200-μl PCR tube (24 μl total per sample). This protocol describes precipitation of nucleic acids from samples of small volumes. Oligo(dT) cellulose beads can be reused multiple times to save on reagent costs. Beads can be regenerated in batch by pooling beads from multiple samples.Pellet the beads by centrifuging for <1 min at 3000 × g, room temperature, in a benchtop centrifuge, and gently remove the supernatant by decanting.Resuspend the beads in 10 ml deionized distilled H2O, vortex briefly, pellet the beads, and discard the supernatant as in step 2. Beads can be regenerated in batch by pooling beads from multiple samples.Pellet the beads by centrifuging for <1 min at 3000 × g, room temperature, in a benchtop centrifuge, and gently remove the supernatant by decanting.Resuspend the beads in 10 ml deionized distilled H2O, vortex briefly, pellet the beads, and discard the supernatant as in step 2. Beads can be regenerated in batch by pooling beads from multiple samples.Pellet the beads by centrifuging for <1 min at 3000 × g, room temperature, in a benchtop centrifuge, and gently remove the supernatant by decanting.Resuspend the beads in 10 ml deionized distilled H2O, vortex briefly, pellet the beads, and discard the supernatant as in step 2. After fragmentation, Ψ residues are specifically derivatized by treatment of RNA with CMC, and subsequent alkaline reversal to remove CMC from G and U residues. After fragmentation, Ψ residues are specifically derivatized by treatment of RNA with CMC, and subsequent alkaline reversal to remove CMC from G and U residues. Fragments of the desired size range are gel purified, and subjected to 3′ adapter ligation, providing a uniform primer binding site for RT. These protocols describe a conventional Illumina library preparation protocol that has been modified to facilitate the identification of Ψs. MaterialsTotal or Poly(A)+ RNA obtained from Basic Protocol 1Deionized distilled H2OIce100 mM ZnCl240 mM EDTA, pH 8.0GlycoBlueBEU buffer (see recipe)CMC (Sigma, cat. MaterialsTotal or Poly(A)+ RNA obtained from Basic Protocol 1Deionized distilled H2OIce100 mM ZnCl240 mM EDTA, pH 8.0GlycoBlueBEU buffer (see recipe)CMC (Sigma, cat. MaterialsTotal or Poly(A)+ RNA obtained from Basic Protocol 1Deionized distilled H2OIce100 mM ZnCl240 mM EDTA, pH 8.0GlycoBlueBEU buffer (see recipe)CMC (Sigma, cat. 