This is critically involved in directional cell migration, as the Golgi apparatus plays an important role in anterograde supply of membrane components to the leading edge for membrane protrusion (Bershadsky and Futerman, 1994; Nabi, 1999; Ridley et al , 2003; Prigozhina and Waterman-Storer, 2004). This eliminated possible build up of chemoattractant or ionic gradients and maintained a stable temperature and pH across the chamber during experiments. The Golgi polarization was virtually the same as in experiments performed in the absence of medium flow (Fig. The Golgi polarization was virtually the same as in experiments performed in the absence of medium flow (Fig. The Golgi polarization was virtually the same as in experiments performed in the absence of medium flow (Fig. The Golgi polarization was virtually the same as in experiments performed in the absence of medium flow (Fig. The Golgi polarization was virtually the same as in experiments performed in the absence of medium flow (Fig. The Golgi polarization was virtually the same as in experiments performed in the absence of medium flow (Fig. Actin polymerization is required for Golgi polarizationTo test whether EF-directed Golgi polarization requires actin polymerization, CHO cells were treated with cytochalasin D. Cell morphology and Golgi polarization was assessed quantitatively using the same method as Fig. A lower concentration of BFA (1 μM) was able to abolish EF-induced Golgi polarization completely whereas Golgi staining was unambiguous for polarization scoring (Fig. Directional sensing is sometimes distinct from cell polarization in Dictyostelium (Devreotes and Janetopoulos, 2003), and cell polarization indicated by polarization of Golgi apparatus (Golgi polarization) can sometimes be uncoupled from cell migration in fibroblasts (Magdalena et al , 2003a; Magdalena et al , 2003b). PI 3-kinase signalling is the compass mechanism in chemotactic directional sensing in Dictyostelium, neutrophils and fibroblasts (Ilijima and Devreotes, 2002; Servant et al , 2000; Xu et al , 2003; Firtel and Chung, 2000; Haugh et al , 2000). Significantly, in addition to secretory traffic directed towards the front of a motile eukaryotic cell, signals from the Golgi matrix play an important role in cell motility and in allowing reorientation of the Golgi towards the direction of movement (Mellor, 2004; Preisinger et al , 2004). Rho family GTPase and EF-induced Golgi polarizationROCK (Rho-associated protein kinases) and cdc42 are required for Golgi polarization in fibroblast 3T3 cells and in primary rat astrocytes (Magdalena et al , 2003a; Nobes and Hall, 1999; Etienne-Manneville and Hall, 2003). Y27632 was used to inhibit p160ROCK and Toxin B was used as a general inhibitor of Rho, Rac and Cdc42. LS203 inhibits cdc42 signalling by binding to the binding motifs of PAK and N-WASP for cdc42/Racl (Vastrik et al , 1999). Golgi polarization correlates well with but lags slightly behind electrotaxis of CHO cellsTo establish the role of Golgi polarization in EF-directed cell migration, we correlated Golgi polarization to the electrotactic response of CHO cells treated with different drugs (Figs 4, 5). PP2 abolished Golgi polarization and decreased trajectory speed to the level of non-EF treated cells (Tables 1, 2; Fig. These include chemoattractant gradients (Nabi, 1999; Xu et al , 2003; Devreotes and Janetopoulos, 2003), mechanical forces (Li et al , 2002; Decave et al , 2003; Wojciak-Stothard and Ridley, 2003) and gradients of adhesiveness (Libotte et al , 2001). 4F–H).In an EF, the directedness value of cell migration rose more rapidly than the percentage of cells showing cathodally directed Golgi polarization in the first hour (Fig. However, BFA treatment did significantly inhibit electrotaxis by reducing the directedness value from 0.93 in to 0.28 (compare Fig. This showed that Golgi polarization lagged slightly behind membrane protrusion but occurred concomitantly with cell morphologic polarization and cell movement toward the cathode. Chemical gradients inevitably form at the wound (Hansen et al , 1993; Sammak et al , 1997; Klepeis et al , 2001). The cells migrated in the same direction as the Golgi polarized (Fig. The cells migrated in the same direction as the Golgi polarized (Fig. This supports the notion that Golgi polarization is not essential for the EF-directed cell movement, but rather permits optimal directional migration in this large electric field. Using this as a convenient tool to polarize cells, we report that an EF of 300 mV/mm induces Golgi polarization towards the cathode that is mediated by Src and PI 3-kinase signalling. Using this as a convenient tool to polarize cells, we report that an EF of 300 mV/mm induces Golgi polarization towards the cathode that is mediated by Src and PI 3-kinase signalling. Using this as a convenient tool to polarize cells, we report that an EF of 300 mV/mm induces Golgi polarization towards the cathode that is mediated by Src and PI 3-kinase signalling. As EFs direct both Golgi polarization and cell migration, we are able to dissect the relationship between the two events in dissociated cells and in monolayer wounds where multiple cues are present. Direct versus indirect effects of EFs on Golgi polarizationTo exclude possible effects of gradients of chemoattractants, ions and pH on cell polarization, we performed cross-current fluid flow experiments (Erickson and Nuccitelli, 1984; Bai et al , 2004). Direct versus indirect effects of EFs on Golgi polarizationTo exclude possible effects of gradients of chemoattractants, ions and pH on cell polarization, we performed cross-current fluid flow experiments (Erickson and Nuccitelli, 1984; Bai et al , 2004). Direct versus indirect effects of EFs on Golgi polarizationTo exclude possible effects of gradients of chemoattractants, ions and pH on cell polarization, we performed cross-current fluid flow experiments (Erickson and Nuccitelli, 1984; Bai et al , 2004). Direct versus indirect effects of EFs on Golgi polarizationTo exclude possible effects of gradients of chemoattractants, ions and pH on cell polarization, we performed cross-current fluid flow experiments (Erickson and Nuccitelli, 1984; Bai et al , 2004). Direct versus indirect effects of EFs on Golgi polarizationTo exclude possible effects of gradients of chemoattractants, ions and pH on cell polarization, we performed cross-current fluid flow experiments (Erickson and Nuccitelli, 1984; Bai et al , 2004). Direct versus indirect effects of EFs on Golgi polarizationTo exclude possible effects of gradients of chemoattractants, ions and pH on cell polarization, we performed cross-current fluid flow experiments (Erickson and Nuccitelli, 1984; Bai et al , 2004). Direct versus indirect effects of EFs on Golgi polarizationTo exclude possible effects of gradients of chemoattractants, ions and pH on cell polarization, we performed cross-current fluid flow experiments (Erickson and Nuccitelli, 1984; Bai et al , 2004). Therefore, Golgi polarization in single cells should be mainly due to the direct effects of the applied EF, rather than indirect means.In the monolayer wound-healing model however, chemical gradients would inevitably form (Hansen et al , 1993; Sammak et al , 1997; Klepeis et al , 2001). Golgi polarization versus Golgi dispersal and directional cell migrationBFA, at high concentrations causes rapid dispersal of Golgi apparatus into endoplasmic reticulum (ER) (Presley et al , 1998; Sciaky et al , 1997; Hirschberg et al , 1998). In order to analyse how Golgi polarization affects cell migration, we chose a much lower concentration of BFA (1 μM). Golgi polarization in response to extracellular cuesScratch-wounding monolayer cultures of fibroblast, astrocytes and endothelial cells generates reproducible and consistent cues to induce Golgi polarization (Etienne-Manneville et al , 2001; Etienne-Manneville et al , 2003; Nobes and Hall, 1999; Magdalena et al , 2003a; Magdalena et al , 2003b). Golgi polarization and cell migration simply followed the field direction and ignored other cues (Figs 7, 8). Intracellular signalling mechanisms of EF-induced Golgi polarization and electrotaxisPI 3-kinase and Src are required for Golgi polarization in the directional cell migration of fibroblast cells (Haugh et al , 2000; Magdalena et al , 2003a). 6).Before Golgi polarization in the EF direction, cells moved more in the direction Golgi polarizes than towards the cathode. LS203 (Cdc42 inhibitor) was a kind gift of L. Smith (synthesized and prepared by Proteomics Facility, University of Aberdeen) (Vastrik et al , 1999). LS203 (Cdc42 inhibitor) was a kind gift of L. Smith (synthesized and prepared by Proteomics Facility, University of Aberdeen) (Vastrik et al , 1999). LS203 (Cdc42 inhibitor) was a kind gift of L. Smith (synthesized and prepared by Proteomics Facility, University of Aberdeen) (Vastrik et al , 1999). LS203 (Cdc42 inhibitor) was a kind gift of L. Smith (synthesized and prepared by Proteomics Facility, University of Aberdeen) (Vastrik et al , 1999). CO2- independent medium was used for experiments performed in room atmosphere. All experiments were performed within passage five. 1 coverglass was applied and sealed with DC4 on top of the chamber as described (Zhao et al , 1996). The dish was placed on a Zeiss Axiovert 100 microscope with temperature control at 37°C. lamellipodia or pseudopodia where active membrane protrusion occurs (Ridley et al , 2003; Manes et al , 2003; Jaffe and Hall, 2003; Nabi, 1999; Xu et al , 2003; Devreotes and Janetopoulos, 2003). Migration rate was analysed with the following three parameters. Fluorescence video imaging of Golgi polarization and cell migrationCHO cells were cultured on glass coverslips coated with fibronectin (5 μg/cm2, Sigma) overnight. Fluorescence video imaging of Golgi polarization and cell migrationCHO cells were cultured on glass coverslips coated with fibronectin (5 μg/cm2, Sigma) overnight. Fluorescence video imaging of Golgi polarization and cell migrationCHO cells were cultured on glass coverslips coated with fibronectin (5 μg/cm2, Sigma) overnight. Fluorescence video imaging of Golgi polarization and cell migrationCHO cells were cultured on glass coverslips coated with fibronectin (5 μg/cm2, Sigma) overnight. Cells extended lamellipodia and started to migrate towards the cathode within 10–30 minutes of EF application. Cells extended lamellipodia and started to migrate towards the cathode within 10–30 minutes of EF application. Cells extended lamellipodia and started to migrate towards the cathode within 10–30 minutes of EF application. Electric field-directed Golgi polarization and asymmetric actin polymerizationIn CHO cells cultured in an applied EF of 300 mV/mm both the Golgi apparatus and actin filaments polarized towards the cathode (Fig. 