Covariates, such as education, sex, and ethnicity, were not associated with these outcomes and were not included in the final model. For patients counseled by pharmacists, there were no significant differences between the intervention and control groups from baseline to 12 months for the 5 A’s (Table 3). This study used the most rigorous design7 to estimate the impact of a tobacco cessation counseling program in a group-randomized trial among physicians and community pharmacists. The discouraging results among pharmacists do not seem to be attributable to a lack of interest or skills to counsel but rather to the existing system not being conducive to implementing the comprehensive (5 A’s) counseling that was advocated in this study. In 2009, we launched a randomized trial (K.S.H., principal investigator; A.V.P., coinvestigator) in community pharmacies (n=64 sites in 2 states) to estimate the impact of 2 methods for promoting the quitline (mailed materials vs academic detailing). In 2009, we launched a randomized trial (K.S.H., principal investigator; A.V.P., coinvestigator) in community pharmacies (n=64 sites in 2 states) to estimate the impact of 2 methods for promoting the quitline (mailed materials vs academic detailing). The content of the tobacco and sun-protection training for physicians and pharmacists was similar, with differences specific to their professional activities. For the smoking cessation training, physicians were trained using a slide presentation format that included vignettes illustrating various physician-patient dialogue scenarios. For the smoking cessation training, physicians were trained using a slide presentation format that included vignettes illustrating various physician-patient dialogue scenarios. For the smoking cessation training, physicians were trained using a slide presentation format that included vignettes illustrating various physician-patient dialogue scenarios. Training was provided for the control group to establish balance between the 2 study arms, in terms of providers’ dedication and interest in being trained in cancer prevention. DATA COLLECTIONBrief surveys were administered to providers before and immediately following the training, and follow-up assessments were conducted at 6 and 12 months after training (posttraining). DATA COLLECTIONBrief surveys were administered to providers before and immediately following the training, and follow-up assessments were conducted at 6 and 12 months after training (posttraining). Owing to logistical issues, not all the providers could be surveyed at both follow-up time points; therefore, we consolidated the data obtained at 6 and 12 months into 1 (extended) follow-up data pool. Interitem correlation coefficients, Cronbach α, and principal axis factor analysis were used to evaluate the validity of the index. The effects of tobacco-counseling training on the counseling practices of non-physician health care providers (eg, pharmacists) are understudied and not well understood.3 Yet, even more so than other clinicians, pharmacists have an ability to interface with all segments of the public. The effects of tobacco-counseling training on the counseling practices of non-physician health care providers (eg, pharmacists) are understudied and not well understood.3 Yet, even more so than other clinicians, pharmacists have an ability to interface with all segments of the public. All item loadings on the extracted factor were at least 0.40. Providers were classified on the ACI index with 2 well-defined groups: those with higher scores on ACI (3 on all measures) and those with lower scores on ACI (<3 on at least 1 measure). The results were summarized using type III tests of fixed effects, F statistics, and P values. Advice from a pharmacist does not require an appointment or medical insurance; as such, pharmacists are capable of reaching and assisting underserved populations, which often exhibit a higher prevalence of tobacco use and incur a disproportionately higher incidence of tobacco-related disease.4 Because medications for smoking cessation are available primarily through pharmacies, pharmacists have a unique opportunity to become an active and recognized resource for assistance with quitting. Advice from a pharmacist does not require an appointment or medical insurance; as such, pharmacists are capable of reaching and assisting underserved populations, which often exhibit a higher prevalence of tobacco use and incur a disproportionately higher incidence of tobacco-related disease.4 Because medications for smoking cessation are available primarily through pharmacies, pharmacists have a unique opportunity to become an active and recognized resource for assistance with quitting. Advice from a pharmacist does not require an appointment or medical insurance; as such, pharmacists are capable of reaching and assisting underserved populations, which often exhibit a higher prevalence of tobacco use and incur a disproportionately higher incidence of tobacco-related disease.4 Because medications for smoking cessation are available primarily through pharmacies, pharmacists have a unique opportunity to become an active and recognized resource for assistance with quitting. HEALTH CARE PROVIDER RECRUITMENT AND RETENTIONProvider recruitment and retention by condition are presented in Figure 1. Some of the health care facilities, located in the Houston area, catered to predominantly low socioeconomic status, ethnic minority patients.The mean (SD) age of physicians was 44 (11) years; over half (57%) were male, and most (69%) were white (6% were African American; 21%, Asian; and 4%, other). Some of the health care facilities, located in the Houston area, catered to predominantly low socioeconomic status, ethnic minority patients.The mean (SD) age of physicians was 44 (11) years; over half (57%) were male, and most (69%) were white (6% were African American; 21%, Asian; and 4%, other). Some of the health care facilities, located in the Houston area, catered to predominantly low socioeconomic status, ethnic minority patients.The mean (SD) age of physicians was 44 (11) years; over half (57%) were male, and most (69%) were white (6% were African American; 21%, Asian; and 4%, other). PROVIDER PERCEPTIONSA slightly higher percentage of physicians completed the extended follow-up survey than pharmacists (95% vs 90%). PROVIDER PERCEPTIONSA slightly higher percentage of physicians completed the extended follow-up survey than pharmacists (95% vs 90%). At baseline, a total of 1571 patients were originally approached, and 119 refused to participate; 1452 completed baseline exit interviews. However, because 12-month follow-up data collection occurred in the same clinics and pharmacies located in the same communities as baseline, there is reason to believe the refusal rate was similar to baseline. The mean (SD) age was 45 (15) years; 70% were female; 81% were white; 15%, African American; and 4%, other. Thirty-four percent were of Hispanic/Latino origin, 52% had completed high school or less, 27% had some college education, and 22% were college graduates. Thirty-four percent of patients were of Hispanic/Latino origin, 52% had completed high school or less, 26% had some college education, and 22% were college graduates. Thirty-four percent of patients were of Hispanic/Latino origin, 52% had completed high school or less, 26% had some college education, and 22% were college graduates. In addition, there were no significant differences in these variables between assessment points. 