To determine whether ERK5, like its substrate MEF2D, has a prominent role in the survival of neurons that depend on retrograde signaling mechanisms, we tested the effects of an ERK5 dominant negative construct (DN-ERK5). When tested in compartmented cultures, this dominant inhibitory construct decreases sensory neuronal survival as assessed by an increase in apoptosis (Figure 3E). Furthermore, like mef2d RNAi, DN-ERK5 has a greater effect on neuronal survival when neurons are supported by neurotrophin stimulation of distal axons compared to survival when neurons are supported by neurotrophin stimulation of cell bodies. As shown in Figure 4A, the anti-apoptotic gene bcl-w is upregulated by neurotrophin stimulation of distal axons by NGF+BDNF, NGF alone, or BDNF alone, and not by cell body stimulation. Similarly, when we analyzed Bcl-w protein levels after cell body or distal axon neurotrophin stimulation, western blotting revealed a significant increase in Bcl-w protein levels (32% ± 5%) upon distal axon stimulation, with no increase observed with cell body stimulation (Figure 4B). Similarly, when we analyzed Bcl-w protein levels after cell body or distal axon neurotrophin stimulation, western blotting revealed a significant increase in Bcl-w protein levels (32% ± 5%) upon distal axon stimulation, with no increase observed with cell body stimulation (Figure 4B). Similarly, when we analyzed Bcl-w protein levels after cell body or distal axon neurotrophin stimulation, western blotting revealed a significant increase in Bcl-w protein levels (32% ± 5%) upon distal axon stimulation, with no increase observed with cell body stimulation (Figure 4B). Both bcl-w and mef2d induction require Trk activation, and so are prevented by K252A, an inhibitor of Trk kinase activity; Trk kinase activity is also required for induction of c-fos (Figure 4C). Therefore, we asked whether inhibition of MEF2D has the same effect on gene expression as DN-MEK5. Therefore, we asked whether inhibition of MEF2D has the same effect on gene expression as DN-MEK5. Of note, when cultures were maintained for 5–7 days before testing as in Figure 4F, the extent of mef2d and bcl-w induction was lower than that seen in our usual paradigm wherein cultures are maintained for 8 days before stimulation. When expressed in sensory neurons, the bcl-w-luciferase construct is induced by neurotrophin stimulation of distal axons (Figure 5B). This may include other promoter elements; for example two sites that resemble half of a CRE binding motif are also present in the bcl-w promoter region (−9871 to−9867 and 2048 to 2052, TGACG). These mice are viable, but males are infertile due to apoptosis in the developing testes (Print et al , 1998; Ross et al , 1998). Therefore, we asked whether the percentage of sensory neurons that express MEF2D is decreased in bcl-w −/− mice. Therefore, we asked whether the percentage of sensory neurons that express MEF2D is decreased in bcl-w −/− mice. Therefore, we asked whether ERK5/MEF2D might regulate additional retrograde response genes as well as bcl-w. Other retrograde response genes might contribute to the differential effect of mef2d RNAi and DN ERK5 on the survival of neurons supported by neurotrophin stimulation of distal axons or cell bodies. Therefore, we asked whether ERK5/MEF2D might regulate additional retrograde response genes as well as bcl-w. Other retrograde response genes might contribute to the differential effect of mef2d RNAi and DN ERK5 on the survival of neurons supported by neurotrophin stimulation of distal axons or cell bodies. We used quantitative RT-PCR to examine a panel of candidate genes that were induced by neurotrophin stimulation of distal axons in Affymetrix gene arrays, and we identified several genes that are preferentially induced by retrograde signaling (Figure 6D). The genes identified as retrograde response genes include igf-1 and alsin, which encode proteins that have been implicated in promoting neuronal survival (Boillee and Cleveland, 2004; Bondy and Cheng, 2004; Davila et al , 2007). The ensuing activation of transcription factors, such as CREB, NFAT, and AP-1 mediate the necessary changes in gene expression in response to target-derived neurotrophins (Riccio et al , 1997; Riccio et al , 1999; Watson et al , 1999; Graef et al , 2003). Retinal ganglion cells exhibit increased dendritic arborisation in response to BDNF applied at the axon terminals, while dendritic arborisation is decreased by BDNF stimulation of dendrites within the retina, indicating that the biological response to neurotrophins varies based on location of stimulation (Lom et al , 2002). Each of these features may contribute to the selective induction of retrograde response genes by distal axon stimulation, with little or no induction by cell body or global stimulation. However, in the face of heightened ERK5 activity, as occurs during distal axon stimulation or in response to cell body stimulation following virus infection or other stress signals, activation of ERK5 may override negative effects of ERK1/2 and so lead to retrograde response gene induction. Neuronal survival is compromised by inhibition of ERK5 activity, and this effect is most dramatic when neurons are supported solely by neurotrophin stimulation of axons. Neuronal survival is compromised by inhibition of ERK5 activity, and this effect is most dramatic when neurons are supported solely by neurotrophin stimulation of axons. However, as survival of Bcl-w −/− sensory neurons is compromised irrespective of the location of neurotrophin stimulation, we postulate that ERK5 and MEF2D regulate additional, anti-apoptotic retrograde response genes. Cell culturesCompartmented chamber cultures (Campenot cultures) were prepared as described previously (Heerssen et al , 2004). Cell culturesCompartmented chamber cultures (Campenot cultures) were prepared as described previously (Heerssen et al , 2004). Cell culturesCompartmented chamber cultures (Campenot cultures) were prepared as described previously (Heerssen et al , 2004). Induction of MEF2D by target-derived neurotrophins promotes survival of sensory neurons appropriately connected in a functional circuit, and this is mediated in part by increased transcription of bcl-w. Nerve growth factor (NGF) and brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) can elicit a wide variety of cellular responses, including proliferation, migration, survival, axonal outgrowth, synapse formation and plasticity (Segal, 2003; Chao et al , 2006; Reichardt, 2006). In contrast, when DRGs are infected with ShGL3-GFP lentivirus, bclw and mef2d are induced by both cell body and distal axon stimulation. In contrast, when DRGs are infected with ShGL3-GFP lentivirus, bclw and mef2d are induced by both cell body and distal axon stimulation. In contrast, when DRGs are infected with ShGL3-GFP lentivirus, bclw and mef2d are induced by both cell body and distal axon stimulation. Plasmids3xMRE-Luc, MEF2-VP16 plasmids were described previously (Flavell et al , 2006). Plasmids3xMRE-Luc, MEF2-VP16 plasmids were described previously (Flavell et al , 2006). Plasmids3xMRE-Luc, MEF2-VP16 plasmids were described previously (Flavell et al , 2006). plenti-hU6BX RNAi plasmids and TK-pRL were from Cellogenetics (Baltimore, MD) and Promega (Madison, WI), respectively. The siRNA against MEF2D was designed and inserted in a lentiviral system as described previously (Flavell et al , 2006). The siRNA against MEF2D was designed and inserted in a lentiviral system as described previously (Flavell et al , 2006). MEF2D 6066 (1:1000 for Western blot and 1:100 for immunostaining) was developed in the Greenberg lab, and generated by injecting antigen (a fragment of MEF2D protein, amino acids 292-514; see Han et al , 1995) into rabbit. Characterization and specificity of this antibody are shown in Supplemental Figure 2. Tissue sections were permeabilized in 0.5% TritonX for 10 minutes and blocked in 5% normal goat serum and 0.1% TritonX for 60 minutes. Sections were incubated overnight at 4°C in MEF2D 6066 (1:100) followed by incubation in goat anti-rabbit Alexa 488 (1:1000) for one hour at room temperature. Sections were incubated overnight at 4°C in MEF2D 6066 (1:100) followed by incubation in goat anti-rabbit Alexa 488 (1:1000) for one hour at room temperature. Neurons were harvested and protein levels of MEF2D were analyzed by Western blot. Inhibitors were added to the cell body and distal axon compartments as indicated. Inhibitors were added to the cell body and distal axon compartments as indicated. Inhibitors were added to the cell body and distal axon compartments as indicated. For in vivo analysis, condensed nuclei using DAPI (1:1000) were counted from post-natal day 0 (P0) bcl-w +/+ or bcl-w −/− animals. Bcl-w −/− mice were a generous gift from Grant MacGregor (UC Irvine) (Ross et al , 1998). These transcription factors are rapidly induced by neurotrophin stimulation of either cell bodies or distal axons, and so are unlikely to be critical for spatially selective responses to neurotrophin stimulation. We next asked whether this spatial selectivity is maintained when sensory neurons are stimulated with NGF or BDNF alone rather than a combination of these neurotrophins. Location of neurotrophin stimulation is important for rapid local responses, for example, neurotrophin stimulation reorients axonal growth towards a trophic factor (McCaig et al , 2000; Markus et al , 2002; Zhou and Snider, 2006). To determine whether neurotrophin stimulation of mef2d might participate in neurotrophin-dependent survival of sensory neurons, we reduced the level of MEF2D using mef2d RNAi expressed in lentivirus (Figure 2A), and then tested the ability of neurotrophins to promote survival in compartmented cultures. In cultures where MEF2D has been reduced by lentivirus RNAi, neurotrophin stimulation of the distal axons is unable to prevent apoptosis (Figure 2B,C). In cultures where MEF2D has been reduced by lentivirus RNAi, neurotrophin stimulation of the distal axons is unable to prevent apoptosis (Figure 2B,C). Consistent with previous studies, activated ERK5 can phosphorylate, hence activate MEF2 (Figure 3A) (Kasler et al , 2000; Seyfried et al , 2005). Consistent with previous studies, activated ERK5 can phosphorylate, hence activate MEF2 (Figure 3A) (Kasler et al , 2000; Seyfried et al , 2005). Stimulation of sensory neurons by neurotrophins, applied either to cell bodies (Figure 3B) or to distal axons (Figure 3C), increases MEF2 phosphorylation by 17 ± 6 % and 20 ± 8 %, respectively. Stimulation of sensory neurons by neurotrophins, applied either to cell bodies (Figure 3B) or to distal axons (Figure 3C), increases MEF2 phosphorylation by 17 ± 6 % and 20 ± 8 %, respectively. 