This may be due to the relatively small study population and in particular to the small BRCA1/2 subpopulations. Larger study populations are therefore warranted to eventually validate our assumption. Third, as mentioned above, the sample size was relatively small, potentially hindering higher significance. Lastly, the manual segmentation is a time consuming process hindering translation into clinical daily practice. Gerlinger et al  was able to reveal branched evolutionary tumor development in metastatic renal cell carcinoma manifesting inter-site tumor heterogeneity, with the clinical implication that single site biopsy underrepresents genetic alterations and is not able to display the complete mutational burden [11]. For the diagnosis of HGSOC, the Gilk’s modification of the World Health Organization criteria served as a reference standard [14].For all patients, histopathologic characteristics such as tumor architecture, nuclear polymorphism or tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes were studied in multiple representative sections of tumors in the adnexa, while the pattern of metastatic disease was described by reviewing all available slides of metastatic deposits, as previously described [15,16].Genetic counseling was received by all patients referred between 2005 and 2008. All patients referred after 2008 were offered genetic counselling and BRCA testing notwithstanding a positive family history. CT data acquisitionAbdomino-pelvic CT scans were performed on a CT scanner from General Electric (GE Medical Systems, Milwaukee, WI) with multiple detector rows (4 to 64). After that, segmentation and data extraction was performed using an open-source medical image processing software (ITK-SNAP) [17]. Each lesion was contoured individually on each single slice, and a region of interest (ROI) was generated and tagged with a color coded label according to its anatomical location (e.g., primary ovarian mass(es), omentum, peritoneal, left upper quadrant). Texture features were computed from the GLCM and consisted of energy (a measure of the amount of grey level variation within a given region), entropy (a measure of randomness or disorder in the distribution of signal intensities), homogeneity (a measure of uniformity in the distribution of co-occurrent intensity pairs) and constrast (a measure of variation in the distribution of co-occurrent intensity pairs). Texture features were computed from the GLCM and consisted of energy (a measure of the amount of grey level variation within a given region), entropy (a measure of randomness or disorder in the distribution of signal intensities), homogeneity (a measure of uniformity in the distribution of co-occurrent intensity pairs) and constrast (a measure of variation in the distribution of co-occurrent intensity pairs). Texture features were computed from the GLCM and consisted of energy (a measure of the amount of grey level variation within a given region), entropy (a measure of randomness or disorder in the distribution of signal intensities), homogeneity (a measure of uniformity in the distribution of co-occurrent intensity pairs) and constrast (a measure of variation in the distribution of co-occurrent intensity pairs). Texture features were computed from the GLCM and consisted of energy (a measure of the amount of grey level variation within a given region), entropy (a measure of randomness or disorder in the distribution of signal intensities), homogeneity (a measure of uniformity in the distribution of co-occurrent intensity pairs) and constrast (a measure of variation in the distribution of co-occurrent intensity pairs). Haralick textures were computed using 5×5 neighborhood using an offset direction of [1–1] and 32 gray levels centered at each voxel using MATLAB (MathWorks Inc., Natick, Massachusetts, United States). To calculate the above mentioned features, at least two metastatic sites are needed in order to reach sufficient validity. To calculate the above mentioned features, at least two metastatic sites are needed in order to reach sufficient validity. Similarly, a doubling of CA-125 level from the nadir or above normal value was considered as progression [21]. PFS was defined as the time between the preoperative CT scan and progression (determined based on either follow-up CT examination and / or CA-125 level). Log-rank test was used to test for significant differences between the survival curves. Twenty-eight patients (32%) were tested positive for BRCA mutation, of whom 18 (64%) had a BRCA1 mutation and 10 (36%) had a BRCA2 mutation. Therefore, we hypothesized that an advanced computational analysis would be able to quantitatively analyze phenotypic traits of standard of care CT scans not apparent to the naked eye. We found that patients with higher SE, SCV and SCP were more highly associated with incomplete cytoreductive surgery in BRCA negative women but not in BRCA positive patients. In the BRCA negative subpopulation of the previous study, patients with peritoneal disease in the left upper quadrant and in the lesser sac, mesenteric involvement, supradiaphragmal lymphadenopathy and lymphatic spread in the suprarenal paraaortic regions were also associated with a higher likelihood of incomplete cytoreductive surgery. These results are in line with previous results, in which low SCP values were associated with a better outcome [19]. 