In addition, Irgm1-deficient cells showed normal Fas and Fas ligand expression (data not shown) and were not more sensitive to Fas-dependent death signals than their wild-type counterparts in the presence or absence of IFN-γ (Fig. In addition, Irgm1-deficient cells showed normal Fas and Fas ligand expression (data not shown) and were not more sensitive to Fas-dependent death signals than their wild-type counterparts in the presence or absence of IFN-γ (Fig. In addition, Irgm1-deficient cells showed normal Fas and Fas ligand expression (data not shown) and were not more sensitive to Fas-dependent death signals than their wild-type counterparts in the presence or absence of IFN-γ (Fig. In addition, Irgm1-deficient cells showed normal Fas and Fas ligand expression (data not shown) and were not more sensitive to Fas-dependent death signals than their wild-type counterparts in the presence or absence of IFN-γ (Fig. 5e) while others showed a near complete absence of cytoplasmic components (Fig. 5e) while others showed a near complete absence of cytoplasmic components (Fig. Although down-regulation of IFN-γ receptor expression has been suggested as one mechanism that protects TH1 lymphocytes from IFN-γ-dependent inhibition19,20, this process occurs only in fully differentiated TH1 cells and thus does not explain how developing T cells survive and proliferate in the presence of autocrine and paracrine IFN-γ during early stages of the response. These findings argue that in the absence of Irgm1, IFN-γ-mediated cell death results primarily from autophagy and this involves a caspase-independent mechanism distinct from that previously described for IFN-γ-dependent death of Igrm1-sufficient CD4+ T lymphocytes16. This activity of Irgm1 is likely to be particularly important in the establishment and maintenance of TH1 responses to persistent intracellular infections. A set of these genes strongly induced by the cytokine encodes the p47 kDa GTPase family21,22. The above difference likely reflects the failure of Irgm1 to be induced in the IFN-γ deficient setting of a TH2 response. Similarly, although the induction requirements and regulatory activity of Irgm1 resemble those of suppressor of cytokine signaling-1 (SOCS1), a known interferon-inducible regulator of IFN-γ signaling, Irgm1 appears to exert distinct regulatory functions when compared to SOCS1. Moreover, the duration and magnitude of tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT1 was not enhanced in IFN-γ stimulated Irgm1–/– CD4+ T cells, in direct contrast to the augmented STAT1 phosphorylation previously described for SOCS1 deficiency43. IFN-γ has been shown to potentiate Fas-dependent TCR-induced cell death in an in vitro model in which the effect of IFN-γ was seen during TCR restimulation only in the absence of accessory cells15 and was shown to be dependent on caspase-8 activation16. IFN-γ has been shown to potentiate Fas-dependent TCR-induced cell death in an in vitro model in which the effect of IFN-γ was seen during TCR restimulation only in the absence of accessory cells15 and was shown to be dependent on caspase-8 activation16. Furthermore, Irgm1-deficient cells are not more sensitive to Fas-dependent TICD in either the presence or absence of IFN-γ. Furthermore, Irgm1-deficient cells are not more sensitive to Fas-dependent TICD in either the presence or absence of IFN-γ. Furthermore, Irgm1-deficient cells are not more sensitive to Fas-dependent TICD in either the presence or absence of IFN-γ. Furthermore, Irgm1-deficient cells are not more sensitive to Fas-dependent TICD in either the presence or absence of IFN-γ. Furthermore, Irgm1-deficient cells are not more sensitive to Fas-dependent TICD in either the presence or absence of IFN-γ. Furthermore, Irgm1-deficient cells are not more sensitive to Fas-dependent TICD in either the presence or absence of IFN-γ. Although originally recognized as an essential cell survival response to starvation, autophagy has now been shown to play a more general role in maintaining cellular homeostasis46,47. IFN-γ is a potent stimulus of autophagy in macrophages and plays an important role in the clearance of pathogens in these cells25,48. In contrast, we observe IFN-γ can induce autophagic death of Irgm1–/– CD4+ T lymphocytes in the presence of intact apoptotic machinery. The common mechanism underlying these distinct activities is presently unclear although the data presented here suggest the autophagic process as a likely candidate worthy of further investigation. Mycobacterium avium26 and Trypanosoma cruzi27 infected Irgm1–/– mice develop a profound pancytopenia, a defect that we have recently shown to be associated with impaired expansion of Irgm1–/– hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell populations28. All mice were maintained in specific pathogen free conditions at an AALAC accredited animal facility at the NIAID, NIH (Bethesda, MD) under a study proposal approved by the NIAID Animal Care and Use Committee. Antibodies and flow cytometryThe following antibodies were purchased from BD Biosciences: fluorescein isothiocyanate–conjugated anti-B220 (RA3-6B2), anti-I-A/I-E (2G9), anti-CD49b (DX5), anti-CD44 (IM7) and anti-IFN-γ (XMG1.2); phycoerythrin-conjugated anti-Vα2 TCR (B20.1), anti-IL-2 (JES6-5H4) and anti-CD25 (PC61); Cy-Chrome-conjugated anti-CD4 (RM4-5); allophycocyanin-conjugated anti-CD62L (MEL-14), anti-CD45.2 (104) and anti-CD11c (HL3); Alexa Fluo647-conjugated anti-IL-4 (11B11). Leukocyte countsNumbers of lymphocytes in lymphoid organs were calculated by multiplying viable cell counts by the percentage of lymphocytes determined by flow cytometry according to their forward and side scatter parameters. In some experiments, recombinant cytokines IL-4 (10 ng/ml), IL-12 (10 ng/ml) and IL-2 (10 – 50 U/ml) as well as mAb specific for IL-4 (11B11,10 μg /ml), IL-12p40 (C17.8,10 μg /ml) and IFN-γ (XMG 6, 10 μg /ml) were included. into C57BL/6.SJL (CD45.1+) mice that were infected i.p. with T. gondii or M. avium 3 days earlier. CFSE dilution was determined by flow cytometry at 20, 48 or 72 h. Secreted IL-2 and IFN-γ in 72 h cultures were measured by ELISA. CFSE dilution was determined by flow cytometry at 20, 48 or 72 h. Secreted IL-2 and IFN-γ in 72 h cultures were measured by ELISA. CFSE dilution was determined by flow cytometry at 20, 48 or 72 h. Secreted IL-2 and IFN-γ in 72 h cultures were measured by ELISA. The latter observation suggested to us that lymphopenia observed in infected Irgm1–/– mice could also be due to decreased survival of mature effector cells. Immunoblotting analysis of Irgm1 expression in primary CD4+ T cellsLymphocytes were lysed with ice-cold TNT lysis buffer (30 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 1% Triton X-100, and 1 × complete protease inhibitor cocktail, Roche) and Irgm1 protein expression was detected with a rabbit polyclonal anti-sera as previously described26. Immunoblotting analysis of Irgm1 expression in primary CD4+ T cellsLymphocytes were lysed with ice-cold TNT lysis buffer (30 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 1% Triton X-100, and 1 × complete protease inhibitor cocktail, Roche) and Irgm1 protein expression was detected with a rabbit polyclonal anti-sera as previously described26. Immunoblotting analysis of Irgm1 expression in primary CD4+ T cellsLymphocytes were lysed with ice-cold TNT lysis buffer (30 mM Tris-HCl, pH 8, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 1% NP-40, 1% Triton X-100, and 1 × complete protease inhibitor cocktail, Roche) and Irgm1 protein expression was detected with a rabbit polyclonal anti-sera as previously described26. Viable cells enriched by Histapaque (Sigma) were exposed to medium or IFN-γ (5 U/ml) for 30 h. Cells fixation and processing for the EM analysis were performed as described previously49. Viable cells enriched by Histapaque (Sigma) were exposed to medium or IFN-γ (5 U/ml) for 30 h. Cells fixation and processing for the EM analysis were performed as described previously49. StatisticsMann-Whitney test was used to determine the significance of differences between groups. 1 online) and thymidine incorporation measured 3 days later. 1 online) and thymidine incorporation measured 3 days later. However, the Irgm1–/– cells showed unimpaired DNA synthesis as measured by BrdU at 72h incorporation at the single cell level (Fig. However, the Irgm1–/– cells showed unimpaired DNA synthesis as measured by BrdU at 72h incorporation at the single cell level (Fig. Importantly, biochemical analysis showed that Irgm1 deficiency did not affect multiple TCR-dependent signaling events associated with the activation (tyrosine and ERK phosphorylation) and survival (IκBα degradation for NF-κB activation and Akt phosphorylation) of CD4+ T cells (Supplementary Fig. Importantly, biochemical analysis showed that Irgm1 deficiency did not affect multiple TCR-dependent signaling events associated with the activation (tyrosine and ERK phosphorylation) and survival (IκBα degradation for NF-κB activation and Akt phosphorylation) of CD4+ T cells (Supplementary Fig. Finally, the Irgm1-dependent defect was observed only upon TCR triggering since Irgm1–/– lymphocytes did not show reduced viability relative to wild-type cells when cultured in medium only (Supplementary Fig. The failure of the OT-II cells to proliferate upon secondary stimulation was not due to impaired cell cycle progression but instead was a consequence of increased death of dividing CD4+ T cells as shown by 5,6-carboxyfluorescein diacetate succinimidyl ester (CFSE) and propidium iodide (PI) co-labeling experiments (Fig. To confirm this finding in a setting in which IFN-γ is completely absent, we crossed Ifng–/– and Irgm1–/– mice to generate animals deficient in both genes. Instead, in agreement with our previous findings26 the decreased survival of infected Irgm1–/– mice was associated with a marked lymphopenia as well as a less pronounced generalized pancytopenia (Supplementary Table 1 online). Instead, in agreement with our previous findings26 the decreased survival of infected Irgm1–/– mice was associated with a marked lymphopenia as well as a less pronounced generalized pancytopenia (Supplementary Table 1 online). Instead, in agreement with our previous findings26 the decreased survival of infected Irgm1–/– mice was associated with a marked lymphopenia as well as a less pronounced generalized pancytopenia (Supplementary Table 1 online). Instead, in agreement with our previous findings26 the decreased survival of infected Irgm1–/– mice was associated with a marked lymphopenia as well as a less pronounced generalized pancytopenia (Supplementary Table 1 online). IFN-γ directly triggers death of Irgm1–/– CD4+ T cellsTo characterize the mechanism of IFN-γ dependent suppression of Irgm1–/– CD4+ lymphocytes, we examined the effects of exogenous IFN-γ on the division and death of anti-CD3 activated Ifng–/– and Irgm1–/–Ifng–/– CD4+ T cells. Irradiated Ifng–/– APCs were used in these experiments to completely exclude endogenous production of the cytokine. 