The c-Fos immunostaining results in the vmPFC are consistent with the behavior results. The c-Fos immunostaining results in the vmPFC are consistent with the behavior results. Golgi staining was used to visualize individualvmPFC neurons in layer 2/3 and to analyze dendritic complexity in BDNFMet/Met as well as in BDNF+/− mice. All genotypes receiving DCS treatment showed equivalent c-Fos levels (vmPFC: F(2,14) = 2.91, p = 0.11) (Figure 6C). All genotypes receiving DCS treatment showed equivalent c-Fos levels (vmPFC: F(2,14) = 2.91, p = 0.11) (Figure 6C). Our data provide several new insights into phenotypes associated with the variant BDNFMet. In this context, it is interesting that humans with the BDNFMet allele have specific deficits in episodic memory, which is hippocampal-dependent, but no deficits in hippocampal-independent processes such as semantic or working memory (Egan et al , 2003; Hariri et al , 2003). In this context, it is interesting that humans with the BDNFMet allele have specific deficits in episodic memory, which is hippocampal-dependent, but no deficits in hippocampal-independent processes such as semantic or working memory (Egan et al , 2003; Hariri et al , 2003). In this context, it is interesting that humans with the BDNFMet allele have specific deficits in episodic memory, which is hippocampal-dependent, but no deficits in hippocampal-independent processes such as semantic or working memory (Egan et al , 2003; Hariri et al , 2003). In this context, it is interesting that humans with the BDNFMet allele have specific deficits in episodic memory, which is hippocampal-dependent, but no deficits in hippocampal-independent processes such as semantic or working memory (Egan et al , 2003; Hariri et al , 2003). In this context, it is interesting that humans with the BDNFMet allele have specific deficits in episodic memory, which is hippocampal-dependent, but no deficits in hippocampal-independent processes such as semantic or working memory (Egan et al , 2003; Hariri et al , 2003). In this context, it is interesting that humans with the BDNFMet allele have specific deficits in episodic memory, which is hippocampal-dependent, but no deficits in hippocampal-independent processes such as semantic or working memory (Egan et al , 2003; Hariri et al , 2003). In this context, it is interesting that humans with the BDNFMet allele have specific deficits in episodic memory, which is hippocampal-dependent, but no deficits in hippocampal-independent processes such as semantic or working memory (Egan et al , 2003; Hariri et al , 2003). We found that BDNFMet/Met mice and BDNF+/− mice, but not BDNF+/Met mice, are slower to extinguish a learned aversive response compared to wild-type counterparts. We found that BDNFMet/Met mice and BDNF+/− mice, but not BDNF+/Met mice, are slower to extinguish a learned aversive response compared to wild-type counterparts. We found that BDNFMet/Met mice and BDNF+/− mice, but not BDNF+/Met mice, are slower to extinguish a learned aversive response compared to wild-type counterparts. In this context, our previous studies have shown that BDNFMet/Met mice displayed increased anxiety-related behaviors in conflict settings (Chen et al , 2006). In this context, our previous studies have shown that BDNFMet/Met mice displayed increased anxiety-related behaviors in conflict settings (Chen et al , 2006). In this context, our previous studies have shown that BDNFMet/Met mice displayed increased anxiety-related behaviors in conflict settings (Chen et al , 2006). In this context, our previous studies have shown that BDNFMet/Met mice displayed increased anxiety-related behaviors in conflict settings (Chen et al , 2006). In this context, our previous studies have shown that BDNFMet/Met mice displayed increased anxiety-related behaviors in conflict settings (Chen et al , 2006). Our findings suggest that human carriers with BDNFMet allele may have a similar impairment in extinguishing aversive or fearful memories after stressful events, and thus may be at increased risk for developing anxiety disorders such as PTSD. Our findings suggest that human carriers with BDNFMet allele may have a similar impairment in extinguishing aversive or fearful memories after stressful events, and thus may be at increased risk for developing anxiety disorders such as PTSD. Our findings suggest that human carriers with BDNFMet allele may have a similar impairment in extinguishing aversive or fearful memories after stressful events, and thus may be at increased risk for developing anxiety disorders such as PTSD. Anatomical changes in vmPFC were investigated and revealed that vmPFC volume was significantly decreased in BDNFMet/Met mice compared to wild-type mice. Anatomical changes in vmPFC were investigated and revealed that vmPFC volume was significantly decreased in BDNFMet/Met mice compared to wild-type mice. Interestingly, thickness of the vmPFC in humans is also correlated with extinction success in fear conditioning studies (Milad et al , 2005). It is widely accepted that neural activity plays a pivotal role in synaptic plasticity. Therefore, the decreased neural activity in vmPFC is consistent with the abnormal CTA extinction observed in BDNFMet/Met and BDNF+/− mice. Therefore, the decreased neural activity in vmPFC is consistent with the abnormal CTA extinction observed in BDNFMet/Met and BDNF+/− mice. Therefore, the decreased neural activity in vmPFC is consistent with the abnormal CTA extinction observed in BDNFMet/Met and BDNF+/− mice. This abnormality in extinction behavior may be explained by abnormalities observed in vmPFC structures and decreased neural activity. In this context, our previous studies have shown that anxiety-related behaviors in BDNFMet/Met mice could not be rescued by the common antidepressant fluoxetine (Chen et al , 2006). In all, our study demonstrates one strategy for how to use model systems of human SNP's to identify novel behavioral phenotypes and novel pharmacologic approaches to treat anxiety disorders. Mice were housed in cages in which they had ad libitum access to food, but restricted (from 09:00 to 9:30 h) access to water presented in two bottles. An aversion index (AI) for the sodium saccharin was calculated as follows: AI (%)=[water intake (g)]/[sodium saccharin intake (g)+water intake (g)]×100. On days 1, 3, 7 and 30 post-training, the two bottle choice test was administered to determine the degree of CTA acquisition and retention (n=10 for each genotype per each retention test). To determine the degree of CTA extinction, the two bottle choice test was repeated for 15 consecutive days post-conditioning. On the 25th day, the two-bottle selective test was repeated in order to evaluate spontaneous recovery of the extinguished CTA memory. Control animals were injected intraperitoneally with corresponding amounts of saline. Coronal sections were serially cut at 20 µm using a freezing microtome. For stereological analysis, 40 μm serial coronal sections were cut throughout whole brain using a freezing sliding microtome. ImmunohistochemistryEvery fourth serially obtained section (60 μm interval) was mounted and processed for c-Fos immunohistochemical staining. Sections were incubated for 20 min in 0.3% hydrogen peroxide in absolute methanol to quench endogenous peroxidase, rinsed (3×, PBS), and blocked in 5% normal goat serum in PBS at room temperature for 1 h. Sections were then incubated with polyclonal anti-Fos (1:500; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA; Catalog No. Sections were incubated for 20 min in 0.3% hydrogen peroxide in absolute methanol to quench endogenous peroxidase, rinsed (3×, PBS), and blocked in 5% normal goat serum in PBS at room temperature for 1 h. Sections were then incubated with polyclonal anti-Fos (1:500; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA; Catalog No. sc253) at 4°C for 24 h followed by biotinylated goat anti-rabbit antibody (Elite kit, Vector Laboratories) incubation. c-Fos immunoreactive nuclei in vmPFC and hippocampus were counted with the aid of NIS-Elements BR image analysis software and the number of positive nuclei per square millimeter in the vmPFC and hippocampus was calculated for both regions. Brains were then embedded in a 3% agarose solution, blocked, and cut at room temperature on a vibratome (150 μm sections). The morphological traits of cells (Fractal dimension analysis) were analyzed using Neuroexplorer, and data were processed and statistical analyses were done using Prism 4.0. Data analyses were performed using SPSS statistical program version 10.0. Unconditioned taste preferencesDuring the initial two-bottle unconditioned taste preference test, preference of four taste solutions (sweet, salty, bitter, and acidic) over water was measured. On the second test day, all genotypes preferred the 0.5% sodium saccharin to water (genotype, F(3,37) = 0.35, p = 0.79; Figure 1A), preferred water slightly to 75 mM NaCl (genotype, F(3,37) = 0.99, p = 0.43; Figure 1B), and avoided 0.02% quinine sulfate (genotype, F(3,37) = 0.39, p = 0.76; Figure 1C) and 0.01 M HCl solutions (genotype, F(3,37) = 0.89, p = 0.48; Figure 1D). In addition, as homozygous BDNF−/− mice have been previously shown to have lingual taste bud deficits (Nosrat et al , 1997), these taste preference results suggest no significant alterations in taste discrimination in the BDNFMet and BDNF+/− mice compared to wild-type mice in this paradigm. Acquisition of CTA memoryMice of all genotypes readily consumed the sodium saccharin solution on the day of conditioning (mean±SEM saccharin solution intake: wild type, 1.53±0.17 ml; BDNF+/Met, 1.76±0.23 ml; BDNFMet/Met, 2.07±0.46 ml; BDNF+/−, 2.10±0.16 ml; genotype, F(3,71) = 2.20, p = 0.15). Retention of CTA memoryTo determine degree of retention for the CTA memory in the BDNFMet and BDNF haploinsufficient mice, the aversion index was measured during the CTA test by varying the post-LiCl injection time interval at which taste aversion was tested (paired with sodium saccharin solution intake) to 3, 7 or 30 days post-conditioning. Comparison among the groups revealed no significant differences across genotypes (genotype, F(3,39) = 0.85, p = 0.48 for 30-day retention test; Figure 3). 