Without optical stimulation (baseline, day 1), ctKI-ChR2 mice preferred the social stimulus rather than the non-social stimulus (object) (Figure 6H). The mean distance between the opsin-free mice and the social stimulus was also not altered by the optical protocol, further confirming that laser illumination itself did not affect the sociability of the mice (Figure 6G). This phenotype of ArpC3 mutant mice arises from a subpopulation of PFC neurons that project to the subcortical regions of the BLA and whose activity is bidirectionally tuned to social interaction and non-social bouts. Optogenetic activation of these neurons in WT mice during the initiation of social contact reproduces the reduced sociability of ArpC3 mutant and ctKO mice. Together, these results support that abnormal circuit PFC-BLA activity in the mutant ArpC3 mice is causally responsible for social dysfunction. Interestingly, social defeat in mice disrupts synchrony among the PFC and amygdala, which leads to stress-induced social dysfunction (Hultman et al , 2016). Interestingly, social defeat in mice disrupts synchrony among the PFC and amygdala, which leads to stress-induced social dysfunction (Hultman et al , 2016). Interestingly, social defeat in mice disrupts synchrony among the PFC and amygdala, which leads to stress-induced social dysfunction (Hultman et al , 2016). Interestingly, social defeat in mice disrupts synchrony among the PFC and amygdala, which leads to stress-induced social dysfunction (Hultman et al , 2016). Interestingly, social defeat in mice disrupts synchrony among the PFC and amygdala, which leads to stress-induced social dysfunction (Hultman et al , 2016). The functional disruption of the Arp2/3 pathway within the PFC-BLA neural projection appears to elevate the excitation of these neurons, in agreement with our previous findings in Arp2/3 mutant neurons (Kim et al , 2015). The functional disruption of the Arp2/3 pathway within the PFC-BLA neural projection appears to elevate the excitation of these neurons, in agreement with our previous findings in Arp2/3 mutant neurons (Kim et al , 2015). We note these effects are most likely postsynaptic in origin due to the sparse, circuit-specific (from PFC to BLA) labeling and KO; however, we cannot completely rule out the possibility of a presynaptic effect. We note these effects are most likely postsynaptic in origin due to the sparse, circuit-specific (from PFC to BLA) labeling and KO; however, we cannot completely rule out the possibility of a presynaptic effect. We note these effects are most likely postsynaptic in origin due to the sparse, circuit-specific (from PFC to BLA) labeling and KO; however, we cannot completely rule out the possibility of a presynaptic effect. Elevation in the E/I balance is known to produce significant impairments in cortical processing and behavioral impairments associated with increased gamma band oscillations. By monitoring neural activity within the PL-BLA projection during social behaviors, we found two populations of neurons, social (+) and social (−), that bidirectionally represent social behavior, the tuning of which is altered in mice with reduced sociability. Our findings, which demonstrate socially tuned (+) and (−) populations both project to the BLA, reveal how the PFC could function to modulate emotional valence by such convergence important for sociability. Our findings, which demonstrate socially tuned (+) and (−) populations both project to the BLA, reveal how the PFC could function to modulate emotional valence by such convergence important for sociability. Conditional ArpC3 knockout (Arpc3f/f) and Ai-14 (B6;129S6-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm14(CAG-tdTomato)Hze/J; stock no. Ai-32 line (B6;129S-Gt(ROSA)26Sortm32(CAG-COP4*H134R/EYFP)Hze/J; stock no. We show that loss of ArpC3 within this circuit is sufficient to recapitulate the reduced sociability of ArpC3 mutant mice. All procedures were conducted with a protocol approved by the Duke University and the University of Tennessee Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee in accordance with US National Institutes of Health guidelines.We used HEK293T cells (ATCC; CRL-11268) to produce and purify adeno-associated viruses as well as to test the selective expression of Cre recombinase by co-expression of AAV-CreN-Rox-stop-Rox-CreC and AAV-WGA-Dre. The HEK293T cells were grown in the Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle’s Medium (DMEM) containing 10% of fetal bovine serum. The viral particles were then concentrated by ultracentrifugation (67,000 × g, 1 hr) using an iodixanol gradient solution (15%, 25%, 40% and 60%), and purified 3 times using an Amicon filter unit (100K MWCO; Millipore) by exchanging into PBS. AAV2/9-hSyn-Flex-GCaMP6s was purchased from UPENN vector core (AV-9-PV2821) and AAV DJ-Ef1α-Flex-eArch3.0-eYFP was purchased from Stanford vector core (GVVC-AAV-55).Stereotaxic injectionsStereotaxic injections were performed as described in our previous report (Kim et al , 2015). AAV2/9-hSyn-Flex-GCaMP6s was purchased from UPENN vector core (AV-9-PV2821) and AAV DJ-Ef1α-Flex-eArch3.0-eYFP was purchased from Stanford vector core (GVVC-AAV-55).Stereotaxic injectionsStereotaxic injections were performed as described in our previous report (Kim et al , 2015). AAV2/9-hSyn-Flex-GCaMP6s was purchased from UPENN vector core (AV-9-PV2821) and AAV DJ-Ef1α-Flex-eArch3.0-eYFP was purchased from Stanford vector core (GVVC-AAV-55).Stereotaxic injectionsStereotaxic injections were performed as described in our previous report (Kim et al , 2015). For testing the circuit selective expression of Cre in the DG, AAV-CreN-Rox-stop-Rox-CreC (100nl; 1×1013 GC/ml) and AAV-WGA-Dre (100nl; 1×1013 GC/ml) were injected into each side of the DG (AP: −2.0, ML ± 1.5, DV: −2.0 from brain surface). Images were taken by tile scan imaging using an LSM 710 confocal microscope (Zeiss) with a 10 × objective under the control of Zen software (Zeiss). Four weeks after surgery, brains were gently removed into ice-cold modified artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF) solution bubbled with 95% O2%–5% CO2 containing the following (in mM): 194 sucrose, 30 NaCl, 2.5 KCl, 1 MgCl2, 26 NaHCO3, 1.2 NaH2PO4, and 10 D-glucose. During the recovery period (30 min), the slices were left in 35.5°C oxygenated aCSF containing the following (in mM): 124 NaCl, 2.5 KCl, 2 CaCl2, 1 MgCl2, 26 NaHCO3, 1.2 NaH2PO4, and 10 D-glucose, pH adjusted to 7.4 with HCl and osmolarity set to 315 mosM. Recording pipettes (3.5–5.5 MΩ) contained the following (in mM): 150 K-Gluconate, 2 MgCl2, 1.1 EGTA, 10 HEPES, 3 Na-ATP, and 0.2 Na-GTP, pH adjusted to 7.2 with CsOH and osmolarity set to ~300 mosM.mEPSCs (miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents) were recorded with 1 μM tetrodotoxin and 50 μM picrotoxin in the bath solution in voltage-clamp mode (cells held at −70 mV). During the recordings, the slice was maintained under continuous perfusion of oxygenated aCSF with a temperature of 28 – 30°C and a flow rate of 2–3 mL/min. The mEPSC or mIPSC was detected using software in pCLAMP10.Cell biologyHEK293T cells were co-transfected with combinations of each viral construct (Ef1α-CreN-Rox-stop-Rox-CreC and Ef1α-WGA-Dre) and Cre-reporter Ef1α-Flex-GFP using FuGENE HD (Promega). All behaviors including nose contact, velocity, and distance traveled across both test phases were analyzed by the EthoVision program (Noldus). All behaviors including nose contact, velocity, and distance traveled across both test phases were analyzed by the EthoVision program (Noldus). All behaviors including nose contact, velocity, and distance traveled across both test phases were analyzed by the EthoVision program (Noldus). The total distance traveled in each chamber, time spent on each chamber, number of transitions between chambers, and total distance moved were detected by photo beam breaks, and analyzed by Med Associates software.Elevated plus mazeThe elevated plus maze apparatus consisted of two open arms (30 × 5 cm) and two closed arms (30 × 5 cm) intersecting at a central platform (5 × 5 cm). Mice were connected to bilateral optic patch cables, placed in the center platform, and were allowed to explore for 15 min. Mice were connected to bilateral optic patch cables, placed in the center platform, and were allowed to explore for 15 min. During the elevated plus maze test, 5 min epochs with alternating laser stimulation was given (OFF-ON-OFF; 5 min per an epoch). On test days, mice were exposed freely in same arena with a social stimulus mouse for 10 min. This method allows accurate source extraction of cellular signals and addresses spatial overlaps between neurons. We updated the spatial and temporal components while fixing the estimated background fluctuations. We updated the spatial and temporal components while fixing the estimated background fluctuations. Calcium transients over 2.0 standard deviation above their mean were counted as calcium events from the background fluctuations. Calcium transients over 2.0 standard deviation above their mean were counted as calcium events from the background fluctuations. Calcium transients over 2.0 standard deviation above their mean were counted as calcium events from the background fluctuations. Calcium transients over 2.0 standard deviation above their mean were counted as calcium events from the background fluctuations. Two to three weeks after viral infection, flat-cut fiber implants (105 μm fiber diameter and 1.25mm OD ferrule) were lowered into place bilaterally targeting the frontal cortex (AP: +2.5 mm, ML: +1.0 mm, DV: −0.8 mm from brain surface) and secured in place using a C&B-Metabond (Parkell) cement covering two screws on the skull.Experimental settingOptogenetic experimental procedures were the same as our previous report(Kim et al , 2015). Two to three weeks after viral infection, flat-cut fiber implants (105 μm fiber diameter and 1.25mm OD ferrule) were lowered into place bilaterally targeting the frontal cortex (AP: +2.5 mm, ML: +1.0 mm, DV: −0.8 mm from brain surface) and secured in place using a C&B-Metabond (Parkell) cement covering two screws on the skull.Experimental settingOptogenetic experimental procedures were the same as our previous report(Kim et al , 2015). During laser activation (day2) session, constant laser stimulation (pulse width 5ms; power 6–8mW) was delivered when the mouse entered the laser zone (20 × 20cm) around the social stimulant until the mouse crossed back outside of the zone. During laser activation (day2) session, constant laser stimulation (pulse width 5ms; power 6–8mW) was delivered when the mouse entered the laser zone (20 × 20cm) around the social stimulant until the mouse crossed back outside of the zone. During laser activation (day2) session, constant laser stimulation (pulse width 5ms; power 6–8mW) was delivered when the mouse entered the laser zone (20 × 20cm) around the social stimulant until the mouse crossed back outside of the zone. During laser activation (day2) session, constant laser stimulation (pulse width 5ms; power 6–8mW) was delivered when the mouse entered the laser zone (20 × 20cm) around the social stimulant until the mouse crossed back outside of the zone. QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSISAll data are expressed as mean ± SEM and all statistics were analyzed using a GraphPad Prism (version 6.01) program. When comparing more than two groups, ANOVA and Bonferroni’s post hoc tests were used. When comparing more than two groups, ANOVA and Bonferroni’s post hoc tests were used. When comparing more than two groups, ANOVA and Bonferroni’s post hoc tests were used. To monitor changes over time, repeated-measures ANOVA followed by Bonferroni’s pairwise comparisons were utilized. Control mice displayed a strong preference for the social stimulus over the non-social stimulus, while KO mice did not, demonstrating a sociability impairment. Control mice displayed a strong preference for the social stimulus over the non-social stimulus, while KO mice did not, demonstrating a sociability impairment. Control mice displayed a strong preference for the social stimulus over the non-social stimulus, while KO mice did not, demonstrating a sociability impairment. Control mice displayed a strong preference for the social stimulus over the non-social stimulus, while KO mice did not, demonstrating a sociability impairment. Statistical analysis revealed that control and rescue mice significantly preferred the social stimulus compared with their baseline preference levels (Figure 1D, NS-NS), whereas KO mice did not. However, manipulating genes within isolated neural circuits is difficult to achieve with high specificity due to technical limitations. A method for Cre expression based on neuronal connectivity with specificity and flexibility would be highly desirous for testing the interactions between gene effect, brain circuitry, and behavior. A method for Cre expression based on neuronal connectivity with specificity and flexibility would be highly desirous for testing the interactions between gene effect, brain circuitry, and behavior. A method for Cre expression based on neuronal connectivity with specificity and flexibility would be highly desirous for testing the interactions between gene effect, brain circuitry, and behavior. A method for Cre expression based on neuronal connectivity with specificity and flexibility would be highly desirous for testing the interactions between gene effect, brain circuitry, and behavior. Two weeks later, tdTomato-positive neuronal cell bodies and dendrites were detected in the ipsilateral side (left), whereas tdTomato axonal fibers were observed in the contralateral (right) hilus of DG (Figure 2G). Two weeks later, tdTomato-positive neuronal cell bodies and dendrites were detected in the ipsilateral side (left), whereas tdTomato axonal fibers were observed in the contralateral (right) hilus of DG (Figure 2G). Thus, this circuit-selective Dre and Cre approach confers an innovative method to express Cre recombinase within select unidirectional neural circuits of the brain. Using ctKO mice and control animals (BLA infection with AAV-WGA versus AAV-WGA-Dre) (Figure 3A), we tested the social interactions of each group in a social affiliation paradigm (Figures 3B and 3C). Additional analysis of open field testing (OFT) also revealed no significant changes in locomotor, stereotypical, or rearing behaviors from controls (Figures S3A–S3E), demonstrating the specificity of the ctKO effectively segregated the altered social behavior from the locomotor disturbances seen in ArpC3f/f:CaMKllCre mice.Because the BLA is also known to regulate anxiety (Roozendaal et al , 2009), we conducted a light-dark emergence test to determine whether the ctKO mice displayed anxiety-like behavior (Figures S3F–S3L). As a pathway model of maladaptive behaviors driven by altered synaptic function, we previously used Cre/Lox genetics to target a critical subunit (ArpC3; GeneBank: NM_019824.4) of the Arp2/3 complex (Kim et al , 2013, 2015), an important cytoskeletal regulator of dendritic spines. As a pathway model of maladaptive behaviors driven by altered synaptic function, we previously used Cre/Lox genetics to target a critical subunit (ArpC3; GeneBank: NM_019824.4) of the Arp2/3 complex (Kim et al , 2013, 2015), an important cytoskeletal regulator of dendritic spines. The amplitude of ctKO IPSC was significantly decreased in the PL compared with control (Figures 4N and 4O; p < 0.05 with t test, p < 0.001 with KS test). The IL analysis revealed that the mean IPSC amplitude was not altered by ArpC3 deletion (Figure 4S; p = 0.231); yet, significant decrease was found by KS test (Figure 4T; p < 0.05). The IL analysis revealed that the mean IPSC amplitude was not altered by ArpC3 deletion (Figure 4S; p = 0.231); yet, significant decrease was found by KS test (Figure 4T; p < 0.05). The IL analysis revealed that the mean IPSC amplitude was not altered by ArpC3 deletion (Figure 4S; p = 0.231); yet, significant decrease was found by KS test (Figure 4T; p < 0.05). Finally, there was no change of mIPSC frequency in the IL region (Figures 4U and 4V). Finally, there was no change of mIPSC frequency in the IL region (Figures 4U and 4V). To determine whether the PFC-BLA projection neurons of WT mice modulate their activity in response to social interactions and whether this is altered in the ctKO mice in real time, we unilaterally labeled the circuit with the genetically encoded calcium indicator GCaMP6s (ctKI-GCaMP6s) using co-infection of AAV-Flex-GCaMP6s in PFC (Figure 5A). 