Expanding the heterocyclic scope to include dissymmetric substrates, epimerizable stereocenters, electrophilic functionalities (e.g., carbonyl, nitrile), remote basic amines, heteroaromatics, and halogenated aromatics remains a major challenge to be overcome for widespread use in late-stage diversification. 4b) was oxidatively methylated with 1 using TFAA/TMSOTf activation/AlMe3 to afford 47 as the syn-diastereomer. 4b) was oxidatively methylated with 1 using TFAA/TMSOTf activation/AlMe3 to afford 47 as the syn-diastereomer. This analog and others are now accessible via cross-coupling with methylated intermediate 47. Tedizolid, a commercial oxazolidinone antibiotic for acute bacterial skin infections, bears numerous oxidatively sensitive functional groups such as a pyridine, tetrazole, and an N-methyl (Fig. An S1P1 antagonist, whose benzylic and aromatic methylations afforded a 2135-fold potency increase6, was methylated in its methyl ester form (51, Fig. While oxidation of the antagonist was successful without need for protection of the aniline motif, the resulting imine was much less reactive than an iminium and required a stronger nucleophile than AlMe3. In carbocyclic substrates, displacement of a C–F bond or ionization with a Lewis acid is difficult; however, mesylates of such aliphatic alcohols are stable and can be activated by AlMe3 to undergo substitution45. In carbocyclic substrates, displacement of a C–F bond or ionization with a Lewis acid is difficult; however, mesylates of such aliphatic alcohols are stable and can be activated by AlMe3 to undergo substitution45. Catalyst control could be leveraged to influence the site- and chemoselectivity of C–H hydroxylation in a broad range of heterocycles (Fig. added, stirred 2 h; rt for 1 h.hGeneral TMSOTf alkylation: crude in CH2Cl2 (0.2 M), TFAA (1 equiv.) sequentially added, stirred 2 h; rt for 1 h.iCrude in CH2Cl2 (0.2 M), MsCl (1 equiv.) added at −78 °C, stirred 2 h; rt for 1 h.jMeMgBr (3 equiv.) added at −78°C, stirred 3 h.kYield by crude 1H NMR. H2O2)27, oxidation of arylated γ-lactam 2 afforded a significant amount of over-oxidation to the corresponding imide (Fig. In contrast, exposure of alcohol 4a to the forcing conditions afforded predominantly imide 4b (54%) with only 17% hemiaminals. High functional group tolerance was also expected given organoaluminum reagents’ ability to methylate oxoniums at late stages in the presence of other electrophilic functionalities34. When unreacted hemiaminal acetate is observed, esterification of the hemiaminal by trifluoroacetic anhydride (TFAA) and subsequent activation of both esters with trimethylsilyl triflate (TMSOTf) to furnish the iminium can be employed34. Alternative activation modes with AlMe3 and methylating reagents with DAST were examined (Extended Data). Accordingly, de novo synthesis, a rate-limiting step in drug discovery that impairs its overall atom-economy, is required9,10. Accordingly, de novo synthesis, a rate-limiting step in drug discovery that impairs its overall atom-economy, is required9,10. Pyrrolidine, the fifth most common nitrogen heterocycle in drugs35,36, undergoes hydroxylation with no significant over-oxidation to pyrrolidinone, followed by BF3-promoted methylation to afford mono-methylated product 9 in 54% yield. Pyrrolidine, the fifth most common nitrogen heterocycle in drugs35,36, undergoes hydroxylation with no significant over-oxidation to pyrrolidinone, followed by BF3-promoted methylation to afford mono-methylated product 9 in 54% yield. Pyrrolidine, the fifth most common nitrogen heterocycle in drugs35,36, undergoes hydroxylation with no significant over-oxidation to pyrrolidinone, followed by BF3-promoted methylation to afford mono-methylated product 9 in 54% yield. Pyrrolidine, the fifth most common nitrogen heterocycle in drugs35,36, undergoes hydroxylation with no significant over-oxidation to pyrrolidinone, followed by BF3-promoted methylation to afford mono-methylated product 9 in 54% yield. Pyrrolidine, the fifth most common nitrogen heterocycle in drugs35,36, undergoes hydroxylation with no significant over-oxidation to pyrrolidinone, followed by BF3-promoted methylation to afford mono-methylated product 9 in 54% yield. Full stereoretention was measured with chiral substrates leading to 12 and 13, indicating that the high regioselectivity is attributed to catalyst control of Mn(CF3PDP) 1 in the C–H cleavage step. Full stereoretention was measured with chiral substrates leading to 12 and 13, indicating that the high regioselectivity is attributed to catalyst control of Mn(CF3PDP) 1 in the C–H cleavage step. Notably, all piperidines furnished a single observed methylated diastereomer, likely as a result of the rigid half-chair conformation of the iminium intermediate37. We explored the ability of highly site- and chemoselective Mn(CF3PDP) 1 catalyzed C–H hydroxylation, coupled to a Lewis-acid/fluorine-promoted methylation, to provide a general method for installing methyl groups directly into the hydrocarbon cores of complex, bioactive molecules, thereby avoiding lengthy and costly de novo synthesis (Fig. Such cross-couplings have shown broad scope with respect to alkyl electrophiles but limited scope of the metalated heterocyclic intermediates generated via substrate-controlled deprotonation or single-electron transfer (SET). The methyl ester of indoprofen, an anti-inflammatory drug investigated for spinal muscular atrophy39, was oxidatively methylated at its central isoindolinone core in synthetically useful yields (29, 33%). A derivative of pozanicline, a neuroprotective drug evaluated for ADHD treatment41, undergoes α-N oxidative methylation at the pyrrolidine in useful yield and diastereoselectivity (32, 34%, 6:1 dr). A derivative of pozanicline, a neuroprotective drug evaluated for ADHD treatment41, undergoes α-N oxidative methylation at the pyrrolidine in useful yield and diastereoselectivity (32, 34%, 6:1 dr). A derivative of pozanicline, a neuroprotective drug evaluated for ADHD treatment41, undergoes α-N oxidative methylation at the pyrrolidine in useful yield and diastereoselectivity (32, 34%, 6:1 dr). A derivative of pozanicline, a neuroprotective drug evaluated for ADHD treatment41, undergoes α-N oxidative methylation at the pyrrolidine in useful yield and diastereoselectivity (32, 34%, 6:1 dr). A derivative of pozanicline, a neuroprotective drug evaluated for ADHD treatment41, undergoes α-N oxidative methylation at the pyrrolidine in useful yield and diastereoselectivity (32, 34%, 6:1 dr). While DAST activation produced similar yields, a higher diastereoselectivity was obtained with BF3 activation (6:1 vs. 3:1), possibly due to different iminium counterions (Fig. The nosyl group on pyrrolidine, a convenient chromophoric protecting group for secondary amines, was readily removed using thiophenol and subsequently protected with tert-butyloxycarbonyl (Boc) to afford 33 in 57% overall yield. Mild, reductive desulfonation followed by reductive amination furnished Me-diclofensine 35 in 82% yield. Mild, reductive desulfonation followed by reductive amination furnished Me-diclofensine 35 in 82% yield. Mild, reductive desulfonation followed by reductive amination furnished Me-diclofensine 35 in 82% yield. DAST activation was used on the majority of these densely functionalized substrates whereas BF3 activation was more effective on the tetrahydroisoquinoline core. 