In contrast, most flies expressing three copies of the UAS-EKO transgene fail to expand their wings. This result is expected because at this temperature Gal80ts constitutively inhibits Gal4 activity and UAS-Kir2.1 is not expressed. However, the number of flies completing development at the higher temperature was very low. Most animals raised at 18°C were found to eclose and expand their wings by day 9 after puparium formation (APF). Most animals raised at 18°C were found to eclose and expand their wings by day 9 after puparium formation (APF). Most animals raised at 18°C were found to eclose and expand their wings by day 9 after puparium formation (APF). Most animals raised at 18°C were found to eclose and expand their wings by day 9 after puparium formation (APF). Almost all animals in which bursicon-expressing neurons were suppressed by transfer to 31°C between days 5-7 APF had unexpanded wings. To do so, we took advantage of an intrinsic temperature-sensitivity in the action of the EKO channel discovered in the course of experiments with the CCAP-Gal4 driver. Flies expressing a single copy of UAS-EKO under the control of CCAP-Gal4 and raised at 18°C uniformly failed to expand their wings, whereas flies of the same genotype raised at 31°C expanded their wings normally. As has been shown previously, injection of bursicon-containing blood into newly emerged blowflies fails to induce air swallowing, though it does induce premature tanning (Cottrell, 1962c). c929-Gal4>3X UAS-EKO animals), demonstrates that the BSEG are necessary for the execution of these behaviors. c929-Gal4>3X UAS-EKO animals), demonstrates that the BSEG are necessary for the execution of these behaviors. c929-Gal4>3X UAS-EKO animals), demonstrates that the BSEG are necessary for the execution of these behaviors. Most of these fibers have pronounced varicosities characteristic of release sites, suggesting that the hormone is being secreted into the central nervous system. In addition, the proximal portions of the lateral abdominal nerves (Fig. In addition, the proximal portions of the lateral abdominal nerves (Fig. Preparations in which only BSEG neurons (Fig 5A) were labeled consistently showed GFP-labeled processes that ramified throughout the CNS. Within the CNS, the BAG processes typically stained weakly with the anti-burs antibody (Fig. Hormones are major determinants of behavior and often insure congruence of an animal's actions and physiological state by exerting their effects both on the brain and on other tissues. Bursicon Neuromodulation of Hormone Release: Bursicon Secretion from the BAG is Attenuated in rickets MutantsThe extensive arborization of the BSEG processes suggests that these neurons have numerous targets within the central nervous system. Consistent with this, Baker and Truman (2002) have shown that rk4 mutants, which lack a functional bursicon receptor, may release variable amounts of the hormone after eclosion, as determined by bioassay. The Burs-IR of BSEG processes is also depleted in rk4 mutants at this time (Fig. In contrast, and consistent with our Western blot data, the Burs-IR of BAG processes in rk4 mutants is often not fully depleted 60 minutes after eclosion (Fig. Fibers with bursicon-immunoreactive varicosities that are characteristically found in the abdominal nerves of both control and mutant animals five minutes after eclosion (Fig. 7C, upper right panel).Figure 7D summarizes the immunostaining results from all preparations analyzed. Burs-Gal4 constructs and transgenic Drosophila linesPCR primers (P252F 5′-TGATTAGCCAATAAGTTGTGAGG-3′ and P252R 5′CTCGTCGGCCCGACTGCGA-3′) were designed to amplify the 252 bp region between the ATG start codon of burs and the stop codon of the nearest predicted coding sequence upstream of it. The PCR product containing this putative burs promoter fragment was cloned using the TOPO TA cloning kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and sequenced using Big Dye chemistry (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) before being subcloned into the EcoRI site of the Gal4 vector, pG4PN (gift of John Carlson Lab, Yale University) and sequenced to check for correct orientation. In contrast, 95% of the BAG in rk4 animals were still present at this time (Fig. One of these lines, P12, with an insert on the 2nd chromosome was used in the work described here. The work presented here demonstrates that this anatomical partition mirrors functional differences between the two subsets of bursicon-expressing neurons. The work presented here demonstrates that this anatomical partition mirrors functional differences between the two subsets of bursicon-expressing neurons. The work presented here demonstrates that this anatomical partition mirrors functional differences between the two subsets of bursicon-expressing neurons. In addition, our finding that apoptosis of the BAG is delayed in rickets mutants exposes a novel neuromodulatory function for bursicon. Anatomical and functional evidence thus supports a humoral role for bursicon released from the BAG, with these neurons mediating changes in the wing cuticle that support expansion. Anatomical and functional evidence thus supports a humoral role for bursicon released from the BAG, with these neurons mediating changes in the wing cuticle that support expansion. Further work will be required to determine the generality of this functional neuronal architecture in insects. Blowflies appear to represent an exception insofar as bursicon has been reported absent in the subesophageal ganglion in these animals (Fraenkel and Hsiao, 1965). Blowflies appear to represent an exception insofar as bursicon has been reported absent in the subesophageal ganglion in these animals (Fraenkel and Hsiao, 1965). Blowflies appear to represent an exception insofar as bursicon has been reported absent in the subesophageal ganglion in these animals (Fraenkel and Hsiao, 1965). Bursicon signaling is mediated by the cAMP pathway (Luo et al , 2005; Mendive et al , 2005) and we showed previously that suppression of Protein Kinase A (PKA), one of the principal effectors of this pathway, decreases the release of bursicon (Luan et al , 2006). Bursicon signaling is mediated by the cAMP pathway (Luo et al , 2005; Mendive et al , 2005) and we showed previously that suppression of Protein Kinase A (PKA), one of the principal effectors of this pathway, decreases the release of bursicon (Luan et al , 2006). Incisions that sever the ventral nerves in the neck of blowflies have also been reported to prevent tanning, but not air swallowing (Fraenkel and Hsiao, 1965), suggesting that air swallowing, like tanning, is initiated by a signal that originates in the head. Further work will be required to test this hypothesis, but since the circuitry and musculature required for molting is substantially eliminated after eclosion (Cottrell, 1962a; Kimura and Truman, 1990; Draizen et al , 1999), it would be parsimonious if bursicon, which mediates the final physiological events of the terminal molt, were also to facilitate the demise of this machinery.In summary, our results provide key insights into the cellular mechanisms underlying bursicon's regulation of wing expansion in Drosophila. Rabbit anti-bursicon α-subunit (anti-burs) antibodies were used at 1:5000 dilution, and mouse anti-bursicon β-subunit (anti-pburs; gift of Aaron Hsueh) were used at 1:500. For quantitation of immunostaining, grayscale, volume-rendered images of the Z-stacks were inverted using Adobe Photoshop (Adobe Systems, Inc., San Jose, CA) and mean pixel values were calculated for a 400×400 pixel square centered over the abdominal nerves immediately after the exit point from the abdominal ganglion, or for a 200×200 pixel square centered over the rostral portion of the 2nd thoracic segment, T2. For quantitation of immunostaining, grayscale, volume-rendered images of the Z-stacks were inverted using Adobe Photoshop (Adobe Systems, Inc., San Jose, CA) and mean pixel values were calculated for a 400×400 pixel square centered over the abdominal nerves immediately after the exit point from the abdominal ganglion, or for a 200×200 pixel square centered over the rostral portion of the 2nd thoracic segment, T2. For quantitation of immunostaining, grayscale, volume-rendered images of the Z-stacks were inverted using Adobe Photoshop (Adobe Systems, Inc., San Jose, CA) and mean pixel values were calculated for a 400×400 pixel square centered over the abdominal nerves immediately after the exit point from the abdominal ganglion, or for a 200×200 pixel square centered over the rostral portion of the 2nd thoracic segment, T2. For quantitation of immunostaining, grayscale, volume-rendered images of the Z-stacks were inverted using Adobe Photoshop (Adobe Systems, Inc., San Jose, CA) and mean pixel values were calculated for a 400×400 pixel square centered over the abdominal nerves immediately after the exit point from the abdominal ganglion, or for a 200×200 pixel square centered over the rostral portion of the 2nd thoracic segment, T2. For quantitation of immunostaining, grayscale, volume-rendered images of the Z-stacks were inverted using Adobe Photoshop (Adobe Systems, Inc., San Jose, CA) and mean pixel values were calculated for a 400×400 pixel square centered over the abdominal nerves immediately after the exit point from the abdominal ganglion, or for a 200×200 pixel square centered over the rostral portion of the 2nd thoracic segment, T2. Mean background pixel values (calculated for each image from a 200×200 pixel field outside of the imaged preparation) were subtracted to derive the “mean pixel intensities” used as a measure of bursicon immunoreactivity for each preparation. At least six preparations were analyzed at each time point by confocal microscopy, and surviving cells were identified from analysis of multiple image planes of confocal Z-series, where they could easily be distinguished from cellular debris, which typically formed smaller immunoreactive spots. To detect DNA fragmentation as a marker of apoptosis, TUNEL labeling was performed on central nervous system preparations excised from animals sacrificed six hours after eclosion. Analysis of expression patternsThe expression pattern of EGFP driven by Burs-Gal4 and c929-Gal4 varied somewhat between individuals, as did the patterns of bursicon immunoreactivity. To represent the intensity and frequency of labeling of individual identified neurons with each driver, we created consensus expression patterns derived from multiple CNS preparations of each genotype. The consensus intensity value (I) for a given neuron was calculated by averaging all non-zero values for this neuron across preparations. The consensus intensity value (I) for a given neuron was calculated by averaging all non-zero values for this neuron across preparations. The consensus intensity value (I) for a given neuron was calculated by averaging all non-zero values for this neuron across preparations. Flies were scored as “unexpanded” (UEW) if the distal tip of the folded wing had assumed an angle of <90° relative to the proximal portion of the wing and as “expanded” (EW) if they had fully unfolded. Flies were scored as “unexpanded” (UEW) if the distal tip of the folded wing had assumed an angle of <90° relative to the proximal portion of the wing and as “expanded” (EW) if they had fully unfolded. Flies were scored as “unexpanded” (UEW) if the distal tip of the folded wing had assumed an angle of <90° relative to the proximal portion of the wing and as “expanded” (EW) if they had fully unfolded. Flies with partially expanded wings (PEW) had intermediate wing morphologies. Flies with partially expanded wings (PEW) had intermediate wing morphologies. Flies with partially expanded wings (PEW) had intermediate wing morphologies. Abdominal Contraction and Air SwallowingExperimental animals were isolated as wandering 3rd instar larvae and transferred to individual food vials to complete development. Air swallowing was quantified by measuring the volume of air in the gut of the fly. Flies were briefly immersed in 100% ethanol to free the cuticle and bristles of air, then submerged in glycerol. The air was released by opening the gut membrane and the liberated bubble was photographed as it rose to the surface. We have shown previously that both wing expansion and bursicon release into the hemolymph can be suppressed in newly eclosed adults by expressing three copies of the transgene encoding the suppressor K+-channel UAS-EKO using the CCAP-Gal4 driver line (Luan et al , 2006). We have shown previously that both wing expansion and bursicon release into the hemolymph can be suppressed in newly eclosed adults by expressing three copies of the transgene encoding the suppressor K+-channel UAS-EKO using the CCAP-Gal4 driver line (Luan et al , 2006). We have shown previously that both wing expansion and bursicon release into the hemolymph can be suppressed in newly eclosed adults by expressing three copies of the transgene encoding the suppressor K+-channel UAS-EKO using the CCAP-Gal4 driver line (Luan et al , 2006). We have shown previously that both wing expansion and bursicon release into the hemolymph can be suppressed in newly eclosed adults by expressing three copies of the transgene encoding the suppressor K+-channel UAS-EKO using the CCAP-Gal4 driver line (Luan et al , 2006). We have shown previously that both wing expansion and bursicon release into the hemolymph can be suppressed in newly eclosed adults by expressing three copies of the transgene encoding the suppressor K+-channel UAS-EKO using the CCAP-Gal4 driver line (Luan et al , 2006). We used the putative promoter/enhancer region of the gene encoding the bursicon α-subunit (also known as burs) to drive expression of Gal4 in bursicon-expressing neurons in transgenic flies as described in Materials and Methods. 1).As shown in Figure 1 (A-B, D), Burs-Gal4 driven UAS-EGFP expression in the central nervous system of the third larval stage largely overlaps with the pattern of immunoreactivity obtained by staining with an anti-burs antibody. The expression pattern of the bursicon β-subunit (also known as pburs) is restricted to a subset of cells in the abdominal segments (Fig. The expression pattern of the bursicon β-subunit (also known as pburs) is restricted to a subset of cells in the abdominal segments (Fig. The expression pattern of the bursicon β-subunit (also known as pburs) is restricted to a subset of cells in the abdominal segments (Fig. The expression pattern of the bursicon β-subunit (also known as pburs) is restricted to a subset of cells in the abdominal segments (Fig. These include cuticle plasticization (Cottrell, 1962b; Reynolds, 1977), apoptosis of the wing epidermis (Kimura et al , 2004), and tanning, or hardening of, the expanded wings (Cottrell, 1962c; Fraenkel and Hsiao, 1962). These include cuticle plasticization (Cottrell, 1962b; Reynolds, 1977), apoptosis of the wing epidermis (Kimura et al , 2004), and tanning, or hardening of, the expanded wings (Cottrell, 1962c; Fraenkel and Hsiao, 1962). These include cuticle plasticization (Cottrell, 1962b; Reynolds, 1977), apoptosis of the wing epidermis (Kimura et al , 2004), and tanning, or hardening of, the expanded wings (Cottrell, 1962c; Fraenkel and Hsiao, 1962). Most of the neurons that express the burs subunit alone are also CCAP-immunopositive (data not shown) and are included in the pattern of Burs-Gal4 expression.The pattern of burs expression becomes more restricted in the pharate adult (Fig. 1E-G), and, as has been noted previously, coincides completely with the expression pattern of pburs (Luan et al , 2006). 1E-G), and, as has been noted previously, coincides completely with the expression pattern of pburs (Luan et al , 2006). 