Determining the origin and biology of BCSCs is important for the development of therapies to reduce the risk of breast cancer relapse. The second possible reason is that CD8 T cells preferentially support enhanced growth of the neu− EMT variants contained as a small population within the E cell line. This is ruled out because these mesenchymal tumors contain the neu oncogene, which is not in the FVB/N genome (5). This is ruled out because these mesenchymal tumors contain the neu oncogene, which is not in the FVB/N genome (5). This is ruled out because these mesenchymal tumors contain the neu oncogene, which is not in the FVB/N genome (5). The only remaining possibility is that CD8 T cells directly induce neu− EMT variants. The only remaining possibility is that CD8 T cells directly induce neu− EMT variants. The only remaining possibility is that CD8 T cells directly induce neu− EMT variants. The only remaining possibility is that CD8 T cells directly induce neu− EMT variants. The only remaining possibility is that CD8 T cells directly induce neu− EMT variants. One enzyme involved in drug resistance in human cancers is O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT), a ubiquitous DNA repair protein that removes O6-alkyl-guanine lesions from damaged DNA and contributes to the resistance of brain cancers to α-chloro-nitrosourea (BCNU) (17). One enzyme involved in drug resistance in human cancers is O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase (MGMT), a ubiquitous DNA repair protein that removes O6-alkyl-guanine lesions from damaged DNA and contributes to the resistance of brain cancers to α-chloro-nitrosourea (BCNU) (17). Since human BCSCs are resistant to ionizing radiation (18), we evaluated this and expression of double-stranded DNA repair pathway components (i.e. Ck5 and Ck14 are expressed by the basal layer and Ck8 and Ck18 by the luminal layer (21, 22). There was no consistent pattern of modulation of Cks observed in the mesenchymal cells. There was no consistent pattern of modulation of Cks observed in the mesenchymal cells. Other frequently cited markers of luminal (EpCAM, MUC1, galectin 3, claudin 4 and Ck18) and basal (CD10, osteonectin, S100, myosin light chain and integrin alpha 6) epithelial phenotypes were also assessed (Figures 5B–C). Of the luminal markers, EpCAM (p<0.0001) and claudin 4 (p<0.0001) were consistently downregulated in all M lines relative to the E lines and MUC1 was not expressed by any line. Herein, we show that EMT induction in vivo involves CD8 T cells and generates BCSCs. While great strides in breast cancer treatment have been made, women treated for the disease remain at high risk for recurrence. These observations are that (1) EMT was induced in vivo by CD8 T cells, (2) EMT generates mesenchymal tumor cells with BCSC properties, and (3) EMT (and BCSC genesis) is not associated with complete loss of epithelial characteristics. In the current study, we found that EMT was induced in vivo without prior manipulation of tumor cells. In the current study, we found that EMT was induced in vivo without prior manipulation of tumor cells. Our conclusion that the tumor cells had undergone EMT was based on a number of molecular and cellular changes including (1) loss of the epithelial markers CD24, E-cadherin, and claudin 3, (2) gain of validated mesenchymal markers N-cadherin and Snail, (3) gain of matrix metalloproteinase activity, and (4) acquisition of a scattered phenotype. The requirement of multiple stimuli for EMT is supported by our prior studies showing that engagement of the IFN-γ receptor is necessary for the generation of antigen-loss variants in vivo, but IFN-γ stimulation in vitro leads only to a modest loss of neu antigen (5). The requirement of multiple stimuli for EMT is supported by our prior studies showing that engagement of the IFN-γ receptor is necessary for the generation of antigen-loss variants in vivo, but IFN-γ stimulation in vitro leads only to a modest loss of neu antigen (5). The requirement of multiple stimuli for EMT is supported by our prior studies showing that engagement of the IFN-γ receptor is necessary for the generation of antigen-loss variants in vivo, but IFN-γ stimulation in vitro leads only to a modest loss of neu antigen (5). One key characteristic of CSCs called into question by our studies is the need for self renewal, a property that ensures preservation of CSCs in the tumor. Inducing a CSC from differentiated daughter cells could likely explain the shortcomings of the hierarchal self-renewing BCSC hypothesis. Inducing a CSC from differentiated daughter cells could likely explain the shortcomings of the hierarchal self-renewing BCSC hypothesis. Although not directly addressed by our study, there are at least two possibilities to explain these discrepancies. Although not directly addressed by our study, there are at least two possibilities to explain these discrepancies. These results are consistent with observations that EMT is associated with some but not all genetic changes ordinarily associated with the stromal or mesenchymal phenotype (39). These results are consistent with observations that EMT is associated with some but not all genetic changes ordinarily associated with the stromal or mesenchymal phenotype (39). These results are consistent with observations that EMT is associated with some but not all genetic changes ordinarily associated with the stromal or mesenchymal phenotype (39). This risk, which remains high for at least one decade, suggests that treated patients still maintain a small population of tumorigenic, albeit dormant, cancer stem cells. Anti-CD3/CD28 received 400,000 mouse Dynabeads (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) per well (~1 bead/5 T cells). 3H thymidine was added, 0.273 nCi per well; 24 hours later cells were harvested and read on a TopCount NXT scintillation counter (Perkin Elmer, Waltham, MA). Flow cytometry reagentsAntibodies and reagents from BD Pharmigen (San Diego, CA) included anti-CD24 FITC (M1/9), anti-CD44 FITC, PE-Cy5 (IM7), anti-Sca1 FITC (D7), anti-Annexin V APC and 7-AAD. The mouse monoclonal antibody against rat neu (7.16.4) was previously described (6). Anti-mouse IgG2a/2b FITC (R2–40) was from BD Pharmigen. Anti-mouse IgG2a/2b FITC (R2–40) was from BD Pharmigen. In vitro coculture of E cells with primed CD8sFVB mice were injected with 5 million E tumor cells and spleens removed 7 days later to isolate primed CD8 T cells as described above. Samples were electrophoresed on 1% agarose gels, imaged on a Gel Doc XR (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA), and band intensities quantified with Quantity One software (ver. DNA repair gene expression analysis was done using DNA Damage Signaling RT2 Profiler PCR Array qPCR kit (SuperArray Bioscience, Frederick, MD) according to the manufacturer’s protocol and run on a Mx3005P thermal cycler (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA). DNA repair gene expression analysis was done using DNA Damage Signaling RT2 Profiler PCR Array qPCR kit (SuperArray Bioscience, Frederick, MD) according to the manufacturer’s protocol and run on a Mx3005P thermal cycler (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA). DNA repair gene expression analysis was done using DNA Damage Signaling RT2 Profiler PCR Array qPCR kit (SuperArray Bioscience, Frederick, MD) according to the manufacturer’s protocol and run on a Mx3005P thermal cycler (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA). 20X images of spheroids were obtained with a Leica DC 200 microscope (Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany) and Fujifilm FinePix 6800 Zoom camera (Fujifilm, Tokyo, Japan). 20X images were gathered using a NanoZoomer Digital Pathology (Bacus Laboratories, Inc.) slide scanner and captured using WebSlide Enterprise software. Eighty to 150 μg of protein was subjected to SDS-PAGE electrophoresis and transferred to PVDF membranes which were blocked for 1 hour with skim milk (3% w/v of PBS with Tween 20: PBS-T) and incubated overnight (4°C) with monoclonal antibodies against BCRP (BXP-21) or PGP (C219) from Calbiochem (Gibbstown, NJ) diluted 1:50 and 1:500, respectively. Anti-β-actin was employed as loading control (AC-74, Sigma Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Cell lines were exposed to increasing concentrations (0, 2.5, 5, 10 and 20 μM) of mitoxantrone (diluted in 95% ethanol) for 72 hours. The following day plate optical densities were measured at 562 nm in an ELISA SpectraMax 190 reader (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, California). Percent inhibition of growth was measured as a percent of control (no mitoxantrone). MMP activity assayThe EnzoLyte 520 Generic MMP Fluorometric Assay Kit (AnaSpec, San Jose, CA) was used according to manufacturer’s directions. Statistical analysesStatistical analysis was performed using Prism 4 for Windows (version 4.03, GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA). Statistical analysesStatistical analysis was performed using Prism 4 for Windows (version 4.03, GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA). Statistical analysesStatistical analysis was performed using Prism 4 for Windows (version 4.03, GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA). Statistical analysesStatistical analysis was performed using Prism 4 for Windows (version 4.03, GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA). Statistical significance was set at p≤0.05. 