Further, the construction of the quality index assumes the first component represents QoC and this cannot be tested empirically, although the PCA model did have logical consistency (with signs of all loadings in the anticipated direction) and was associated with delivery in a health facility. The 2016 KRHS enrolled women aged 15–49 years for a face-to-face interview using a structured questionnaire. Subsequently, households within the selected enumeration area were randomly selected from a listing. Detailed information on study background and key findings are publicly available.16 Written consent was obtained from participants before the survey interview. Data from only the most recent birth for each woman was used. Stata/SE v14.2 was used for analysis (release 14; StataCorp LP, College Station, TX, USA). Stata/SE v14.2 was used for analysis (release 14; StataCorp LP, College Station, TX, USA). The sign of the load was used to assess positive or negative correlation between that variable and the component. The sign of the load was used to assess positive or negative correlation between that variable and the component. The sign of the load was used to assess positive or negative correlation between that variable and the component. Individually, non-significant variables (P<0.050) were removed from the model but retained if any of the remaining estimates changed by more than 10%. Goodness-of-fit of the linear model was assessed using the R2, plot of residuals, and linktest command in Stata.19 Use of sampling weights excluded estimation of some regression diagnostic parameters but also provided robustness to model misspecification.20 Only 197 (6%) had completed more education than primary school and 1035 (33%) received income (money or goods) for work outside the home in the previous year. Only 197 (6%) had completed more education than primary school and 1035 (33%) received income (money or goods) for work outside the home in the previous year. The variables with the highest loadings on the first component included ever giving a urine or blood sample (0.35 and 0.34, respectively), having blood pressure or height measured at least once (0.30 and 0.27, respectively), being tested for HIV (0.26), and being advised to develop a birth plan (0.24). ANC quality scores were predicted for each participant from the PCA and multiplied by 100. The median value of the transformed score was 25 (IQR 115–138) and was left-skewed (Fig. Central to the question of the optimal components of ANC is the quality of the health care provided. There was a statistically significant interaction between level of education and participation in religious services at least weekly. It was found that multiple basic services, including providing a urine and blood sample and having blood pressure checked, were most associated with higher quality ANC score. It was found that multiple basic services, including providing a urine and blood sample and having blood pressure checked, were most associated with higher quality ANC score. Number of visits and timing of initiation of care, having height and weight measured, being tested for HIV, receiving malarial prophylaxis, and reporting receiving key counseling messages about pregnancy complications and birth preparation were also important components of quality. Conversely, receiving a tetanus vaccination, receiving counseling about family planning, and sleeping under a mosquito net were less related to quality of ANC score. A recent analysis23 of quality of ANC in 91 low- and middle-income countries defined quality as having blood pressure checked and receiving blood and urine testing. A recent analysis23 of quality of ANC in 91 low- and middle-income countries defined quality as having blood pressure checked and receiving blood and urine testing. In that analysis, among women in low-income countries, 85% had blood pressure measured, 72% had blood sample taken, and 62% had urine samples taken. In 2016, WHO published comprehensive recommendations for ANC3 that were adopted by the Tanzanian Ministry of Health in 2018.24 A number of the recommended interventions (or a proxy)— including HIV screening, provision of malaria prophylaxis, screening for asymptomatic bacteriuria, measurement of hemoglobin, and provision of tetanus vaccine—were included in the quality index in the present study and all of these, with the exception of tetanus vaccination, were predictive of a higher quality score. We chose to use the previous recommendation of four visits because 75% of the births in the present study occurred before the updated guidance and less than 1% of women in the sample had eight or more contacts. We chose to use the previous recommendation of four visits because 75% of the births in the present study occurred before the updated guidance and less than 1% of women in the sample had eight or more contacts. We chose to use the previous recommendation of four visits because 75% of the births in the present study occurred before the updated guidance and less than 1% of women in the sample had eight or more contacts. We chose to use the previous recommendation of four visits because 75% of the births in the present study occurred before the updated guidance and less than 1% of women in the sample had eight or more contacts. 