The questionnaire given to each participant after the experiment had been completed. The questionnaire given to each participant after the experiment had been completed. The overall mean reaching error was −2.5 ± 0.2 cm, and there was no main effect of visual exposure condition on this general rightward error (rubber hand palm-down = −2.3 ± 0.3 cm, rubber hand palm-up = −2.5 ± 0.3 cm, wooden block = −2.8 ± 0.3 cm). The overall mean reaching error was −2.5 ± 0.2 cm, and there was no main effect of visual exposure condition on this general rightward error (rubber hand palm-down = −2.3 ± 0.3 cm, rubber hand palm-up = −2.5 ± 0.3 cm, wooden block = −2.8 ± 0.3 cm). The overall mean reaching error was −2.5 ± 0.2 cm, and there was no main effect of visual exposure condition on this general rightward error (rubber hand palm-down = −2.3 ± 0.3 cm, rubber hand palm-up = −2.5 ± 0.3 cm, wooden block = −2.8 ± 0.3 cm). The overall mean reaching error was −2.5 ± 0.2 cm, and there was no main effect of visual exposure condition on this general rightward error (rubber hand palm-down = −2.3 ± 0.3 cm, rubber hand palm-up = −2.5 ± 0.3 cm, wooden block = −2.8 ± 0.3 cm). The overall mean reaching error was −2.5 ± 0.2 cm, and there was no main effect of visual exposure condition on this general rightward error (rubber hand palm-down = −2.3 ± 0.3 cm, rubber hand palm-up = −2.5 ± 0.3 cm, wooden block = −2.8 ± 0.3 cm). Separate ANOVAs comparing pairs of conditions confirmed that reaching behaviour in the rubber hand condition was significantly different from both the rubber palm-up (exposure condition, F(1, 20) = 0.08, p = .79; left hand position, F(3, 60) = 59.3, p < .001; left hand position by exposure condition interaction, F(3, 60) = 7.49, p < .001) and the wooden block conditions (exposure condition, F(1, 20) = 0.66, p = .42; left hand position, F(3, 60) = 78.4, p < .001; left hand position by exposure condition interaction, F(3, 60) = 5.30, p < .005). There was no significant difference between reaching in these latter two conditions (exposure condition, F(1, 20) = 0.28, p = .61; left hand position, F(3, 60) = 49.5, p < .001; left hand position by exposure condition interaction, F(3, 60) = 0.45, p .72).Variable errorThere was a significant main effect of visual exposure condition, but no other significant terms in the ANOVA of the variable error data arising from Experiment 2. Analysing each question separately with a one-way ANOVA revealed only five questions where a significant effect of visual exposure condition on the subjective ratings was found. Analysing each question separately with a one-way ANOVA revealed only five questions where a significant effect of visual exposure condition on the subjective ratings was found. Post-hoc comparisons between individual conditions for each question revealed that the majority of the significant differences between conditions arose from comparisons between the rubber hand and the wooden block conditions (5 out of 10 comparisons, p < .05). Post-hoc comparisons between individual conditions for each question revealed that the majority of the significant differences between conditions arose from comparisons between the rubber hand and the wooden block conditions (5 out of 10 comparisons, p < .05). Post-hoc comparisons between individual conditions for each question revealed that the majority of the significant differences between conditions arose from comparisons between the rubber hand and the wooden block conditions (5 out of 10 comparisons, p < .05). The only questionnaire items that were significantly correlated with the reaching errors were those that related to the feeling that the rubber hand in the mirror, and on the table, were the participants’ real left and right hands, respectively. First, this result suggests that following visual exposure to the rubber hand, the subjective ‘rubber hand illusion’ was not particularly evident, at least on average in the participants tested here, according to the answers they gave (several participants did indeed feel strong illusory components of the rubber hand illusion, but as is quite common in rubber hand illusion studies, the strength of the illusory effects vary considerably across participants, e.g., see Botvinick & Cohen, 1998; Ehrsson et al , 2004). The four visual exposure conditions were therefore: 1) Real palm-down (real right hand visible in the mirror, in a palm-down posture); 2) Real palm-up (real right hand visible in the mirror, in a palm-up posture; 3) Rubber palm-down (rubber hand visible in the mirror in a palm-down posture, real right hand hidden behind the paper screen in a palm-down posture); 4) Rubber palm-up (rubber hand visible in the mirror in a palm-down posture, real right hand hidden behind the paper screen in a palm-up posture). ResultsConstant errorThe reaching error data are displayed in Figure 5, and were entered into a three-way ANOVA with the variables of left hand position (7.5, 12.5, 17.5, and 22.5 cm), right hand posture (palm-down vs. palm-up), and visible hand (real right hand vs. rubber hand). The ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of left hand position, F(3, 69) = 96.94; p < .001, but no significant main effect of right hand posture, F(1, 23) = 0.06, p = .82, or of visible hand, F(1, 23) = 2.16, p = .16. The ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of left hand position, F(3, 69) = 96.94; p < .001, but no significant main effect of right hand posture, F(1, 23) = 0.06, p = .82, or of visible hand, F(1, 23) = 2.16, p = .16. The ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of left hand position, F(3, 69) = 96.94; p < .001, but no significant main effect of right hand posture, F(1, 23) = 0.06, p = .82, or of visible hand, F(1, 23) = 2.16, p = .16. The ANOVA revealed a significant main effect of left hand position, F(3, 69) = 96.94; p < .001, but no significant main effect of right hand posture, F(1, 23) = 0.06, p = .82, or of visible hand, F(1, 23) = 2.16, p = .16. This interaction was significant, F(3, 69) = 19.20, p < .001, revealing that the interaction between the left hand position and the right hand posture depended upon the visible hand (i.e., whether the posture of the right hand was visible or not). This interaction was significant, F(3, 69) = 19.20, p < .001, revealing that the interaction between the left hand position and the right hand posture depended upon the visible hand (i.e., whether the posture of the right hand was visible or not). This analysis revealed that, when the participants’ real right hand was visible in the mirror, the interaction between left hand position and right hand posture was significant, F(3, 69) = 35.74, p < .001, while when the rubber hand in a palm-down posture was visible in the mirror, there was no significant interaction between left hand position and right hand posture, F(3, 69) = 0.54, n.s. This analysis revealed that, when the participants’ real right hand was visible in the mirror, the interaction between left hand position and right hand posture was significant, F(3, 69) = 35.74, p < .001, while when the rubber hand in a palm-down posture was visible in the mirror, there was no significant interaction between left hand position and right hand posture, F(3, 69) = 0.54, n.s. This analysis revealed that, when the participants’ real right hand was visible in the mirror, the interaction between left hand position and right hand posture was significant, F(3, 69) = 35.74, p < .001, while when the rubber hand in a palm-down posture was visible in the mirror, there was no significant interaction between left hand position and right hand posture, F(3, 69) = 0.54, n.s. This analysis revealed that, when the participants’ real right hand was visible in the mirror, the interaction between left hand position and right hand posture was significant, F(3, 69) = 35.74, p < .001, while when the rubber hand in a palm-down posture was visible in the mirror, there was no significant interaction between left hand position and right hand posture, F(3, 69) = 0.54, n.s. This result supports the visual hypothesis and contradicts the bilateral postural hypothesis, and suggests that the enhanced reaching biases we have observed following vision of the rubber hand are an exclusively visual phenomenon, with no significant contribution from postural information relating to the unseen right hand.The size of the reaching bias following exposure to the rubber hand was smaller than following exposure to the real hand in Experiment 3. While almost every participant we have tested in a series of mirror-reaching experiments shows an effect of vision of their real hand, the effects of the rubber hand are strong, but somewhat less consistent between individuals, with some showing no effect at all, and others showing stronger effects for exposure to the rubber hand than to their real hand. While almost every participant we have tested in a series of mirror-reaching experiments shows an effect of vision of their real hand, the effects of the rubber hand are strong, but somewhat less consistent between individuals, with some showing no effect at all, and others showing stronger effects for exposure to the rubber hand than to their real hand. While almost every participant we have tested in a series of mirror-reaching experiments shows an effect of vision of their real hand, the effects of the rubber hand are strong, but somewhat less consistent between individuals, with some showing no effect at all, and others showing stronger effects for exposure to the rubber hand than to their real hand. While almost every participant we have tested in a series of mirror-reaching experiments shows an effect of vision of their real hand, the effects of the rubber hand are strong, but somewhat less consistent between individuals, with some showing no effect at all, and others showing stronger effects for exposure to the rubber hand than to their real hand. This possibility was tested explicitly with an additional ANOVA on the two rubber hand conditions data alone (collapsed), with the between-participants factor of block order (1 to 4). While we have not yet tested this possibility explicitly, the results of Experiments 1 to 3 led us to believe that this possibility was unlikely. We also reasoned that if we could devise two similar tasks which differed in their visual-proprioceptive congruence with respect to the apparent unseen hand (i.e., the mirror-reflection), and the real unseen hand (the left hand hidden behind the mirror), then any differences in reaching behaviour must therefore be due to the visual-proprioceptive congruence, rather than to the performance of the secondary task per se. Typically, the strength of the illusion as determined from the questionnaire ratings is strongly correlated with errors in the post-exposure pointing responses (Botvinick & Cohen, 1998). Further still, and particularly in relation to the rubber hand and wooden block conditions of Experiments 1 to 3, it is also possible that there is something specific to the two visual exposure objects (the rubber hand and the wooden block), or perhaps to the residual illusory experience of viewing rubber hands, that necessarily entails that participants devote more visual attention to the rubber hand and less to the wooden block during the exposure period. At a random point in time between three and seven seconds after the beginning of each trial, the LED flashed either once (for 200 ms), or twice (65 ms ON, 70 ms OFF, and 65 ms ON). After 8.5 seconds from the beginning of the trial, a tone (400 Hz, 500 ms duration) was presented from the computer. ResultsConstant errorIn Experiment 5, unlike Experiments 1 to 4, we also performed an analysis on errors in the front-back (y) direction. Alternatively, if proprioceptive changes are a consequence of the rubber hand illusion, then any changes in proprioception following visual exposure to rubber hands should be strongly associated with the illusory experience of ‘ownership’ of the rubber hand. There were no significant effects or interactions involving the visual exposure condition for errors in the y-direction.Variable errorIn the left-right (x) direction, there was a significant effect of left hand position on the variable reaching error, with the leftmost starting position showing higher variable error than the other positions (7.5 cm = 0.53 ± 0.04 cm, 12.5 cm = 0.47 ± 0.03 cm, 17.5 cm = 0.56 ± 0.39 cm, 22.5 cm = 0.63 ± 0.05 cm). Experiment 1 showed that 12 seconds’ visual exposure to the reflection of the participants’ own right hand induced significant biases in subsequent reaching movements of the left hand, and that this bias was equal in magnitude when vision of a rubber right hand was substituted for vision of the real hand. Furthermore, and perhaps surprisingly, there were no significant effects of gender or skin colour on the interaction between hand position and visual exposure condition (again, data refereed but not reported here). This latter result may be surprising given that the rubber hand we used was similar to that of a small Caucasian female’s hand, yet the participants varied widely in height and skin colour, though the majority were female (61 of 87, 70%). This latter result may be surprising given that the rubber hand we used was similar to that of a small Caucasian female’s hand, yet the participants varied widely in height and skin colour, though the majority were female (61 of 87, 70%). This latter result may be surprising given that the rubber hand we used was similar to that of a small Caucasian female’s hand, yet the participants varied widely in height and skin colour, though the majority were female (61 of 87, 70%). In conjunction with previous results from our laboratory (Holmes & Spence, 2005; Holmes et al , 2004), the present results imply that passive visual exposure to artificial hands in a congruent posture induces a visual recalibration of proprioception of the participant’s real hand position toward the position of the artificial hand (in the present experiments, toward the ‘virtual’ position of the rubber hand). In conjunction with previous results from our laboratory (Holmes & Spence, 2005; Holmes et al , 2004), the present results imply that passive visual exposure to artificial hands in a congruent posture induces a visual recalibration of proprioception of the participant’s real hand position toward the position of the artificial hand (in the present experiments, toward the ‘virtual’ position of the rubber hand). In conjunction with previous results from our laboratory (Holmes & Spence, 2005; Holmes et al , 2004), the present results imply that passive visual exposure to artificial hands in a congruent posture induces a visual recalibration of proprioception of the participant’s real hand position toward the position of the artificial hand (in the present experiments, toward the ‘virtual’ position of the rubber hand). In conjunction with previous results from our laboratory (Holmes & Spence, 2005; Holmes et al , 2004), the present results imply that passive visual exposure to artificial hands in a congruent posture induces a visual recalibration of proprioception of the participant’s real hand position toward the position of the artificial hand (in the present experiments, toward the ‘virtual’ position of the rubber hand). In conjunction with previous results from our laboratory (Holmes & Spence, 2005; Holmes et al , 2004), the present results imply that passive visual exposure to artificial hands in a congruent posture induces a visual recalibration of proprioception of the participant’s real hand position toward the position of the artificial hand (in the present experiments, toward the ‘virtual’ position of the rubber hand). The table was covered with white paper to provide a homogenous background surface.Three exposure objects were used: The participants’ real right hand, an artificial, realistic looking prosthetic right hand (approximately 16 cm from fingertips to wrist, plus approximately 4 cm in length of ‘forearm,’ 9 cm wide, 5 cm high), and a block of wood (7 x 4.5 x 20 cm). Verbal feedback (e.g., “too far left” or “too far right”) was provided on the accuracy of these practice reaches, and the experimenter moved the participants’ finger onto the target for additional feedback. The rubber hand was oriented with its palm facing down (i.e., matching the posture of both the participants’ hands); in the wooden block condition, the furthest left lower corner of the wooden block was positioned on the right hand mark.Each trial began with the experimenter moving the participants’ left index finger back (from the target on the first trial of each block, or from the previous reaching endpoint on all subsequent trials) to one of the left hand position marks according to a predetermined pseudorandomised sequence. Participants were instructed to gaze toward the virtual target location just prior to and during the reaching movement, to leave their index finger in the position where it first touched the table behind the mirror, and not to make any end-point corrections after touching down on the table surface.The experimenter marked the landing position of the participants’ left index finger on the graph paper using a different colour pen for each starting position. Participants were instructed to gaze toward the virtual target location just prior to and during the reaching movement, to leave their index finger in the position where it first touched the table behind the mirror, and not to make any end-point corrections after touching down on the table surface.The experimenter marked the landing position of the participants’ left index finger on the graph paper using a different colour pen for each starting position. Participants were instructed to gaze toward the virtual target location just prior to and during the reaching movement, to leave their index finger in the position where it first touched the table behind the mirror, and not to make any end-point corrections after touching down on the table surface.The experimenter marked the landing position of the participants’ left index finger on the graph paper using a different colour pen for each starting position. Participants were given a short break after each block of trials, during which time the experimenter changed the graph paper and visual exposure object in preparation for the next condition.The layout of the left hand position marks, the right hand position mark, and the target location meant that the conflict induced between the visually- and the proprioceptively-specified left hand position was, from right to left −7.5 cm (the 7.5 cm left hand position mark) −2.5 cm (12.5 cm mark), +2.5 cm (17.5 cm mark), and +7.5 cm (the 22.5 cm mark, where positive values represent real (proprioceptive) left hand positions to the left of the apparent (visual) left hand position, and negative values to the right of the apparent position). Reaching errors to the left of the target were assigned a positive endpoint error, and errors to the right were assigned negative values. These data are displayed graphically in Figure 2, and the ANOVA statistics are displayed in Table 1. This general bias was similar between visual exposure conditions (real hand = −1.6 ± 0.3 cm, rubber hand = −1.6 ± 0.4 cm, wooden block = −1.5 ± 0.4 cm, where negative values represent endpoints to the right of the target), and is probably attributable to the asymmetrical posture that participants adopted in order to see their hands in the mirror: The participants’ body midline was slightly to the right of the mirror, and unseen reaching movements often show general biases toward the midline (e.g., Ghilardi, Gordon, & Ghez, 1995). Most importantly, however, is that the size of this endpoint bias (reflected in the gradient of the slope in Figure 2) depended significantly upon the visual exposure condition (i.e., a significant interaction between left hand position and exposure condition). Passive exposure to a wooden block, by contrast, had a smaller effect on subsequent reaching movements than exposure to either the real hand or to the rubber hand. Passive exposure to a wooden block, by contrast, had a smaller effect on subsequent reaching movements than exposure to either the real hand or to the rubber hand. Passive exposure to a wooden block, by contrast, had a smaller effect on subsequent reaching movements than exposure to either the real hand or to the rubber hand. These results favour the ‘rubber hand hypothesis’ – that the visual information concerning arm position available via the reflection of a rubber hand is sufficient to increase the visual bias of reaching under conditions of visual-proprioceptive conflict, and contrast with both the ‘visual object hypothesis’ and the ‘real hand / bilateral proprioceptive hypothesis.’There was a bias in reaching movements in the wooden block conditions, corresponding to an under-reach of about 17% of the lateral distance to the target. These results favour the ‘rubber hand hypothesis’ – that the visual information concerning arm position available via the reflection of a rubber hand is sufficient to increase the visual bias of reaching under conditions of visual-proprioceptive conflict, and contrast with both the ‘visual object hypothesis’ and the ‘real hand / bilateral proprioceptive hypothesis.’There was a bias in reaching movements in the wooden block conditions, corresponding to an under-reach of about 17% of the lateral distance to the target. These results favour the ‘rubber hand hypothesis’ – that the visual information concerning arm position available via the reflection of a rubber hand is sufficient to increase the visual bias of reaching under conditions of visual-proprioceptive conflict, and contrast with both the ‘visual object hypothesis’ and the ‘real hand / bilateral proprioceptive hypothesis.’There was a bias in reaching movements in the wooden block conditions, corresponding to an under-reach of about 17% of the lateral distance to the target. 