However, gaps in the standardization process for MNSI training and administration across sites and lack of electro-physiology and/or small-fiber-specific measures limit our ability to assess in depth the whole benefit (or harm) of the interventions used in ACCORD on DSP. There are several lessons to be learned from recent large trials regarding the associations between glucose control and neuropathy. There are several lessons to be learned from recent large trials regarding the associations between glucose control and neuropathy. The size of the study population, the duration of the intervention, and the neuropathy assessment used biases and limited conclusions that may be drawn from these trials. Observational studies have shown that glucose control is critical for neuropathy prevention in both T1D and T2D (Fig. Observational studies have shown that glucose control is critical for neuropathy prevention in both T1D and T2D (Fig. However, different lessons are learned from randomized controlled clinical trials of glucose control in T1D and T2D (Fig. However, different lessons are learned from randomized controlled clinical trials of glucose control in T1D and T2D (Fig. However, different lessons are learned from randomized controlled clinical trials of glucose control in T1D and T2D (Fig. DCCT/EDIC and other smaller trials strongly demonstrated that intensive control designed to achieve near-normal glycemia is essential to preventing or delaying progression of DSP and CAN in T1D [27]. Earlier data suggested that glucose control is beneficial if implemented earlier in the disease course in patients with fewer comorbidities, [17] but later studies did not confirm these findings [18, 21, 55, 58•]. Earlier data suggested that glucose control is beneficial if implemented earlier in the disease course in patients with fewer comorbidities, [17] but later studies did not confirm these findings [18, 21, 55, 58•]. The presence of multiple comorbidities and risk factors, including hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and obesity, among most T2D patients included in these trials, the polypharmacy required to reach glucose targets, and the high incidence of hypoglycemia and weight gain might have attenuated the effects of glucose control and contributed to inconsistent findings among T2D study populations. Vibration perception threshold (VPT) testing was performed at EDIC year 13–14 [26•, 29]. Loss of protective sensation heightens the risk for foot ulceration and lower extremity amputations, and painful symptoms are frequently refractory to treatment [2, 7]. Clinically evident neuropathy was defined as at least two positive findings among sensory symptoms, signs, or reflex abnormalities consistent with a distal symmetrical polyneuropathy as assessed clinically by a neurologist; abnormal NCSs were defined by the presence of at least one abnormal NCS attribute >2 nerves among the median, peroneal, and sural nerves [11–13, 26•]. The rest of the large trials used less robust DSP measures, often limited to clinical instruments (Table 1). The rest of the large trials used less robust DSP measures, often limited to clinical instruments (Table 1). Thus, the evaluation of the impact of glucose control on neuropathy outcomes in many large randomized trials is limited by the lack of uniformity of DSP definitions and measures used. DSP was a secondary outcome in most of these trials, and the costs and burden to sponsors, sites, and participants could have prohibited more comprehensive DSP evaluations. DSP was a secondary outcome in most of these trials, and the costs and burden to sponsors, sites, and participants could have prohibited more comprehensive DSP evaluations. DSP was a secondary outcome in most of these trials, and the costs and burden to sponsors, sites, and participants could have prohibited more comprehensive DSP evaluations. DSP was a secondary outcome in most of these trials, and the costs and burden to sponsors, sites, and participants could have prohibited more comprehensive DSP evaluations. A summary of CAN measures used in large glucose control trials is provided in Table 2. Rigorous and comprehensive CAN evaluations were performed in DCCT/EDIC. CAN was assessed during DCCT at baseline every 2 years and at DCCT-end and in EDIC during years 13–14 and 16–17, using standard cardiovascular reflex testing (CARTs) that included R–R variation to paced breathing (RRV), R–R response to Valsalva maneuver (VR), and postural changes in blood pressure [26•, 27, 40]. These tests are objective, standardized, simple to use, highly reproducible [41, 42], and endorsed by the Toronto Consensus on Diabetic Neuropathies as the gold standard [2, 43]. Participants were questioned about autonomic symptoms at EDIC year 13–14 [27, 41]. Less standardized assessments were used in other large trials (Table 2). Less standardized assessments were used in other large trials (Table 2). EURODIAB queried symptoms and changes in heart rate and blood pressure with standing [39, 44], while the UKPDS assessed R–R intervals with deep breathing and standing [18]. Steno-2 assessed R–R interval during paced breathing and presence of orthostatic-hypotension [23], ADDITION obtained resting heart rate variability and some CARTs, but only at the 6-year follow-up visit. Lessons from Type 1 Diabetes Trials Strong correlations were also observed between A1c and the prevalence of CAN at baseline [44]. The prevalence of CAN almost doubled in the conventional group by DCCT-end, while remaining static in the intensive group [11, 40]. The prevalence of CAN almost doubled in the conventional group by DCCT-end, while remaining static in the intensive group [11, 40]. The prevalence of CAN almost doubled in the conventional group by DCCT-end, while remaining static in the intensive group [11, 40]. The DCCT/EDIC has furthered the understanding of the role of glucose control in the development and progression of neuropathy [26•, 27]. The DCCT/EDIC has furthered the understanding of the role of glucose control in the development and progression of neuropathy [26•, 27]. The A1c separation between former intensive and conventional treatment groups observed through the DCCT-end quickly waned; by the 5th year of EDIC follow-up, no statistically significant A1c separation remained [41]. CAN prevalence also increased by EDIC year 13–14 (29 % in the intensive vs. 35 % in the conventional group), with treatment group differences remaining significant [26•, 41]. The adjusted RRV was significantly higher in the former intensive group, as compared with the conventional group [41]. The adjusted RRV was significantly higher in the former intensive group, as compared with the conventional group [41]. Although one third of DCCT/EDIC participants had CAN by the 13–14th year of EDIC follow-up, few participants reported autonomic symptoms. Lessons from Type 2 Diabetes Trials Table 1 provides a comprehensive summary of DSP measures used in large observational and randomized glucose control trials. Since no measures of neuropathy were assessed during the observational follow-up of the UKPDS, unveiling a potential long-term beneficial “legacy effect,” as observed for cardiovascular outcomes [54], was not possible. The effects of glucose control on DSP/CAN development in this elderly cohort with multiple comorbidities are difficult to interpret, especially given that reliance on self-report to define neuropathy outcomes has a large potential for bias. The effects of glucose control on DSP/CAN development in this elderly cohort with multiple comorbidities are difficult to interpret, especially given that reliance on self-report to define neuropathy outcomes has a large potential for bias. The effects of glucose control on DSP/CAN development in this elderly cohort with multiple comorbidities are difficult to interpret, especially given that reliance on self-report to define neuropathy outcomes has a large potential for bias. 