Hoechst easily detected condensed or fragmented nuclei and the vital probe propidium iodide excluded necrotic cells with damaged cell membranes. Phiphilux is a new generation cell permeable probe which emits fluorescence in the red (G2D2) or green (G1D2) when cleaved by active caspase 3. In some studies we used an Olympus FV1000-MPE confocal/multiphoton microscope equipped with a Spectra Physics MaiTai Deep See laser and gallium arsenide 12-bit detectors. The 2 setups showed similar results.9,10 We estimate that the power at the surface of the kidney was between 2 and 28 mw. At these later time points, Phiphilux signal could be seen in a small punctate subapical pattern that partially co-localized with the green autofluorescence signal (inset in Fig. To determine whether this activation of phiphilux was related to the presence of constitutionally active caspase 3 in S1, we imaged the kidney of a sham caspase 3 KO mouse. In Figure 3, we followed the Phiphilux signal in a sham wild-type kidney volume over a 2 hour time period, imaging intermittently every 30 minutes. We noted a decrease in the Phiphilux signal in S1 and an increase in Hoechst fluorescence in various tubules indicative of photodamage. Ischemia reperfusion is known to induce caspase 3 activation and apoptosis in S2 and S3 renal tubules.11 To determine whether this can be detected by Phiphilux, we imaged the kidney of a wild-type mouse after 40 minutes of ischemia. However, within 30 minutes after reperfusion, some Phiphilux signal could be detected in S2 tubular cells (Fig. Sixty minutes following reperfusion, Phiphilux positive S2 cells with condensed nuclei suggestive of apoptosis could be easily detected in random fields (Fig. Occasionally, Phiphilux signal was detected in damaged S2 cells shed into the S2 lumen (Fig. At no time did we observe apoptotic nuclei or diffuse cytoplasmic Phiphilux signal in S1. Indeed, most ischemia-induced apoptosis in the kidney is confined to S2 and S3 segments. Indeed, most ischemia-induced apoptosis in the kidney is confined to S2 and S3 segments. Non-caspase proteases such as calpains could be involved in this process.12,13 However, their distribution and activity in various tubular sub segments are unknown. Non-caspase proteases such as calpains could be involved in this process.12,13 However, their distribution and activity in various tubular sub segments are unknown. That this Phiphilux signal in apoptotic S2 cells is indeed a read-out of caspase 3 activity could theoretically be confirmed by performing the ischemia reperfusion experiment in caspase 3 KO mice. 