The current study focuses on the topical delivery of pure 1 and P. barbatus extract on guinea pig and human skin to determine the skin disposition and rates of transport of 1. An in vitro skin diffusion study of pure forskolin (1) versus P. barbatus extract in hairless guinea pig skin and human skin in a flow-through diffusion cell system was conducted. In this study, the diffusion of forskolin was quantified by LC-MS. Representative profiles of the in vitro permeation study of human skin and guinea pig skin treated with pure 1 and P. barbatus extract are shown in Figure 1. Permeation data obtained with pure 1 and P. barbatus extract are shown in Table 1. The guinea pig skin flux value for pure 1 was 3.4 ± 1.7 nmol/cm2/h with a lag time of 2.8 ± 1.8 h. Unexpectedly, it was found that topical treatment with an equimolar concentration of 1 in P. barbatus extract was significantly different, with flux and lag time values of 18.5 ± 2.3 nmol/cm2/h and 5.5 ± 2.9 h, respectively. Similar differences were observed in human skin; flux values for forskolin from pure 1 and P. barbatus extract were 0.18 ± 0.04 and 3.6 ± 1.0 nmol/cm2/h, with lag times of 1.5 ± 0.6 and 4.8 ± 3.0 h, respectively. As expected in human skin, a tissue more resistant to drug transport, flux values for forskolin (both from pure 1 and from P. barbatus extract) were lower [19-fold for pure 1 (p < 0.001) and 5-fold for P. barbatus extract (p < 0.001)] than the corresponding values in guinea pig skin. The results of these permeation studies showed clearly that 1 (both from the P. barbatus extract and chemically pure 1) can be delivered transdermally, although at different permeation rates through the skin from pure 1 as compared to P. barbatus extract. Many chemicals have enhanced skin permeation of drugs via different mechanisms, such as altering skin barrier lipids or changing partitioning of the drug.18–20 Additional work needs to be completed to identify the potential permeation enhancer(s) in P. barbatus extract and determine whether skin permeation rates of 1 are enhanced through barrier disruption and/or changing physicochemical properties of the drug in the matrix, such as stratum corneum/vehicle partition coefficient changes or solubility changes in the vehicle. In 2008, 62 480 newly diagnosed melanomas were expected with 8420 individuals predicted to die of melanoma.6 Eumelanin and pheomelanin are two basic types of pigment in the skin. All topical agents used in the skin permeation experiment were prepared as a w/v solution in a standard dermatologic vehicle of 70% ethanol and 30% propylene glycol. Skin sections were obtained by using a Padgett dermatome (Integra LifeSciences Corporation; Plainsboro, NJ) set to 250 μm; these sections were stored at −20 °C. Eumelanin is the brown-black pigment polymer preferentially expressed in people with the darkest complexion and is highly protective against UV radiation. In Vitro Permeation StudiesPermeGear flow-through (In-line, Hellertown, PA) diffusion cells were kept at 32 °C with a circulating water bath. Samples were collected in 3 h increments for 24 h. All samples were stored at 4 °C, until analyzed by liquid chromatography/mass spectroscopy (LC-MS). The cumulative quantity of forskolin collected in the receiver compartment from pure 1 and P. barbatus extract was plotted as a function of time (Figure 1). A Symmetry C18 (2.1 × 150 mm, 5 μm) column with a Sentry Symmetry C18 guard column (2.1 × 10 mm, 3.5 μm) was used with the LC-MS system. The capillary voltage was set at 3.0 kV and cone voltage set at 25 V, where the source block temperature and desolvation temperature were 120 and 250 °C, respectively. The gradient elution mobile phase initially consisted of 45% A:55% B. The initial 45% mobile phase A was increased linearly to 62% over 10 min, maintained for 1 min, and then decreased linearly to 45% in 1 min and maintained for 8 min. CH3CN solutions used to extract drug from the skins were diluted with additional CH3CN and injected onto the column. Data Evaluation and Statistical AnalysisThe in vitro permeation data were calculated to assess permeation activity of forskolin on human skin and guinea pig skin treated with pure 1 and P. barbatus extract. Values of 1 flux and skin content treated with P. barbatus extract were compared to those treated with pure 1 on the same type of skin; flux data from the same drug solutions on different skin types were also compared. 