To address this issue, multiple stakeholders came together to identify innovative methods for collecting YRBSS data at the county level outside of schools. The intent was to guide public health policy and practice related to adolescent health while increasing the visibility of adolescents in the county and to allow youth-serving agencies to better understand specific needs and strengths of the youth they serve. Even when done in schools, these data are mostly collected by sampled classrooms, or school districts, and whole counties are rarely involved, as has been the case with Allegheny County [1]. To our knowledge, the only prior attempt to conduct a phone survey about adolescent health behavior was conducted by the Pennsylvania Department of Health using an already recruited household panel that required parental consent [14]. This project sought to address barriers to collecting comprehensive adolescent health behavior data. This project sought to address barriers to collecting comprehensive adolescent health behavior data. The mismatch, therefore, may reflect African-American-specific barriers to research participation in general [21] and the fact that we oversampled landline numbers when a greater proportion of African-Americans are likely to live in cellphone-only households [22]. Without oversampling minority groups, subgroup analyses of large data may not be informative [23]. Convenience sample precludes us from combining the two samples, and the marginalized youth sample size reflected resource limitations not ideal statistical subgroups. Stakeholder engagement using participatory evaluation may facilitate the use of results by these decision makers [17]. Stakeholder engagement using participatory evaluation may facilitate the use of results by these decision makers [17]. There are limitations to this county-level adolescent health assessment. The most recent YRBS school-based surveys showed 64%–90% student response rate and 99% overall quality control which includes completion rate [28]. The most recent YRBS school-based surveys showed 64%–90% student response rate and 99% overall quality control which includes completion rate [28]. With landlines and cell phone sampling frames, combined response rates were 38.4% and cooperation rates were about 50%. Low response rates indicate possible biases, though we were unable to evaluate for these in the current study. Therefore, we believe that bias resulting from a low response rate has been minimized. A sampling of half the 42 districts in our county would have a similar cost to our county-wide methods. We believe that having county-wide data will allow reluctant school systems to see the benefits of this information and thus invest in school-based data collection. A parallel, in-person survey conducted with a convenience sample of youth made up the “marginalized youth sample.” To capture varied experiences, we used a wide convenience sampling strategy of youth who are marginally housed, incarcerated, or in residential homes based on county human services estimates. The marginalized youth sample included 262 youth, about 10% of the marginalized youth population. The marginalized youth sample included 262 youth, about 10% of the marginalized youth population. The marginalized youth sample included 262 youth, about 10% of the marginalized youth population. The marginalized youth sample included 262 youth, about 10% of the marginalized youth population. The marginalized youth sample included 262 youth, about 10% of the marginalized youth population. The marginalized youth sample included 262 youth, about 10% of the marginalized youth population. Participants were also asked about exposure to violence and neglect using previously validated items from the National Survey of Children’s Exposure to Violence, as well as questions about hope and future orientation, social supports, and neighborhood cohesion [8–11]. Participants were also asked about exposure to violence and neglect using previously validated items from the National Survey of Children’s Exposure to Violence, as well as questions about hope and future orientation, social supports, and neighborhood cohesion [8–11]. Participants were also asked about exposure to violence and neglect using previously validated items from the National Survey of Children’s Exposure to Violence, as well as questions about hope and future orientation, social supports, and neighborhood cohesion [8–11]. Procedures for Phone-Based SampleWe recruited youth via RDD with two separate frames, one for landlines and another for cell phones. Procedures for Phone-Based SampleWe recruited youth via RDD with two separate frames, one for landlines and another for cell phones. Training included interviewing skills, refusal conversion, dispositioning of call attempts, and rehearsal of interview scripts. We oversampled landlines as preparatory work, which showed greater likelihood of finding homes with eligible youth with landline numbers.Youth provided verbal assent (for minors) or consent (for those ages 18 or 19). We asked 1,860 teens if they wanted us to speak with their guardians, with 169 (9.1%) stating they wanted parental approval. Justification in the marginalized sample was the same, though we noted the possible lack of parental availability. Live interviewers explained the IVR system to the participant prior to switching over from CATI to IVR. The phone survey was conducted over a 10-month period from February 2014 to November 2014. The phone survey was conducted over a 10-month period from February 2014 to November 2014. Research assistants were experienced with survey methods and trained by authors H.A. and E.M.For youth who were being served at community sites (i.e., not incarcerated), community partners were provided with recruitment materials to share with interested youth. and E.M.For youth who were being served at community sites (i.e., not incarcerated), community partners were provided with recruitment materials to share with interested youth. None of Allegheny County’s 42 school districts have conducted the YRBSS with their entire student population. Iterative proportional fitting was applied to adjust for nonresponse by adjusting design weights across several dimensions to ensure weighted frequencies matched population totals obtained from Census 2010 SF1 Public Use Microdata Sample and other external sources. Findings will be made available via topic-specific briefs for key stakeholders, including youth-serving agencies, policymakers, and local school boards with the goal of increasing interest and support in conducting school-based YRBSS in the future. While a few have participated in statewide sampling, large districts like Pittsburgh Public School District have not; citing concerns about sensitive questions and time required. With landlines and cell phone sampling frames combined response rates were 38.4% and cooperation rates were about 50%. After switching to IVR,1,554 of the 1,645 who started the IVR portion completed the survey, a loss of 9%. Similarly, of the 1813 who started the survey, 1,645 completed the interviewer portion, also a loss of 9% suggesting that the modes are similar in attrition rates. About five percent of youth were identified as sexual minority (ranging from not completely or mostly heterosexual). Youth in the phone-based sample were predominantly stably housed with 4.2% reporting past-year homelessness.Table 3 shows results of marginalized youth sample. Youth in the phone-based sample were predominantly stably housed with 4.2% reporting past-year homelessness.Table 3 shows results of marginalized youth sample. 