Transducer learning algorithms are based on the conditional probability computation. Unfortunately, no other resources were open on Westgrid that allowed us to compare them.In the next section, the main results are presented. The Breezy specifications are summarized in Table 2. The Breezy specifications are summarized in Table 2. EvaluationOn this configuration, the sequential and parallel implementations were executed, following the designed experiments.6.2.1. Data sizeRegarding the different sizes of the database, important improvement were obtained by the parallel implementation. These results can be seen in table 3 and figure 1.The execution times and speedups were obtained for several database (Li) sizes. Table 3 shows these values. Table 3 shows these values. All these techniques are intrinsically costly for computation when they are implemented; and when they are applied to bioinformatics the computational cost further increases. All these techniques are intrinsically costly for computation when they are implemented; and when they are applied to bioinformatics the computational cost further increases. This is a better measure that the actual execution times to set a better picture of the parallel implementation.6.2.1. Indeed, speedups and reduction in execution times are computed. Indeed, speedups and reduction in execution times are computed. However the sequential implementation converges around the third computed precision value (1.00E-3). However the sequential implementation converges around the third computed precision value (1.00E-3). However the sequential implementation converges around the third computed precision value (1.00E-3). However the sequential implementation converges around the third computed precision value (1.00E-3). However the sequential implementation converges around the third computed precision value (1.00E-3). This tendency is due to the threshold value of the parallel implementation is reached faster, allowing the algorithm to converge from the first precision values. Numbers of ThreadsAnother changed parameter was the number of threads, a grid related parameter. Numbers of ThreadsAnother changed parameter was the number of threads, a grid related parameter. Numbers of ThreadsAnother changed parameter was the number of threads, a grid related parameter. speedup is increased when the number of threads is larger. In other words, with number of thread greater than 16, the algorithm converges around nine seconds. Several experiments were designed to evaluate our implementation, using as a baseline Breezy cluster, in Westgrid grid. Experiments were grouped in three different goals: (1) increasing database size, (2) increasing precision, and (3) changing the numbers of threads. However, these values for parallel implementation were increased close to linear. When the number of threads was increased, the speedup rose. When the number of threads was increased, the speedup rose. WestGrid is a grid that operates across western Canada offering high performance computing, collaboration and visualization infrastructure [16]. WestGrid is a grid that operates across western Canada offering high performance computing, collaboration and visualization infrastructure [16]. It permits to speed up the performance of the algorithm. Together, TORQUE and Moab provide a suite of commands for submitting jobs, altering some of the properties of waiting jobs (such as reordering or deleting them), monitoring their progress and killing ones that are having problems or are no longer needed. Other strategies use multicore network processors for bioinformatics processing [18], as well as GPU techniques. Other strategies use multicore network processors for bioinformatics processing [18], as well as GPU techniques. a cluster on Westgrid) there is available BLAST (Basic Local Alignment Search Tool), which is a suite of tools for assessing the similarity of a given sequence of proteins or nucleotides with a database of sequences [21]. One of the main uses of the learning conditional transducer algorithm applied to bioinformatics is for classification. Many applications of Machine Learning methods have been developed for use in Bioinformatics. Some of the most important approaches applied to this field are Neural Network, Support Vector Machine, Bayesian Networks and Hidden Markov Model [1-4]. However, EM algorithm has remarkable dependencies for the different stages in the computation process. However, EM algorithm has remarkable dependencies for the different stages in the computation process. Taking these issues into consideration, a shared memory machine technique for parallel implementation was finally selected, using OpenMP (a C based parallel programming language) and C++ language. During the implementation of the parallel version, “pragma omp parallel for” instruction of OpenMP language was used, in the outer for loop of this algorithm. In this case, dependencies are in the internal for loop, being each thread responsible for the execution of the Forward, Backward and Expectation methods involved in this algorithm. These parameters are: data size and precision. Indeed, we have considered one more parameter related to the grid, i.e. In this case, values have been increased by: In this case, values have been increased by: In this case, values have been increased by: 