The analysis of the salience network showed a main effect of type of connection (F(2, 34) = 23.87, P < .001) reflecting more ipsilateral right hemisphere connections, followed by more bilateral connections, and then ipsilateral left hemisphere connections. The analysis of the salience network showed a main effect of type of connection (F(2, 34) = 23.87, P < .001) reflecting more ipsilateral right hemisphere connections, followed by more bilateral connections, and then ipsilateral left hemisphere connections. The analysis of the salience network showed a main effect of type of connection (F(2, 34) = 23.87, P < .001) reflecting more ipsilateral right hemisphere connections, followed by more bilateral connections, and then ipsilateral left hemisphere connections. In addition, there was a main effect of time (F(1,17) = 5.15, P < .05) and an interaction between type and time (F(2,34) = 3.75, P < .05). In addition, there was a main effect of time (F(1,17) = 5.15, P < .05) and an interaction between type and time (F(2,34) = 3.75, P < .05). In addition, there was a main effect of time (F(1,17) = 5.15, P < .05) and an interaction between type and time (F(2,34) = 3.75, P < .05). Laterality of Specific Region and Network Connectivity to Other Areas Pre- and Post-HIRREMThe final set of analyses assessed the laterality of connections between the networks and specific ROIs to nodes outside of those networks or regions. Laterality of Specific Region and Network Connectivity to Other Areas Pre- and Post-HIRREMThe final set of analyses assessed the laterality of connections between the networks and specific ROIs to nodes outside of those networks or regions. The interaction of hemisphere with time of testing (F(1,17) = 5.08, P <.05) reflected an increase in connections involving the left salience network post-HIRREM compared to pre-HIRREM, whereas the opposite pattern was true for the right salience network, although more connections involved the right salience network at both times. Post-HIRREM Brain Lateralization and PTSD SymptomsIn a further check of the relationship between brain lateralization and PTSD symptoms in this sample, we correlated the symptoms reported on the PCL-M inventory with whole brain lateralization, and with lateralization in the SN. At baseline, there were numerous main effects of connection type (ipsilateral for either side, or contralateral in either direction), for the whole brain as well as within networks or regions, and between networks or regions. At baseline, there were numerous main effects of connection type (ipsilateral for either side, or contralateral in either direction), for the whole brain as well as within networks or regions, and between networks or regions. At baseline, there were numerous main effects of connection type (ipsilateral for either side, or contralateral in either direction), for the whole brain as well as within networks or regions, and between networks or regions. At baseline, there were numerous main effects of connection type (ipsilateral for either side, or contralateral in either direction), for the whole brain as well as within networks or regions, and between networks or regions. Adjudication of these interpretations may be possible by comparison of the presently reported asymmetries with results from future hypothesis-driven studies. Regarding the outcomes that could be related to the intervention, a finding of particular interest was in between the network analysis: After HIRREM, there was a reduction in connections between the right hemispheric nodes of the salience network, and other regions. Regarding the outcomes that could be related to the intervention, a finding of particular interest was in between the network analysis: After HIRREM, there was a reduction in connections between the right hemispheric nodes of the salience network, and other regions. However, research specifically looking at the lateralization of functional connectivity in this population is lacking. Because a majority of the participants reported prior traumatic brain injury or concussion as comorbid medical conditions, it is possible that this may have been the etiology of some of the baseline laterality findings. Because a majority of the participants reported prior traumatic brain injury or concussion as comorbid medical conditions, it is possible that this may have been the etiology of some of the baseline laterality findings. Because a majority of the participants reported prior traumatic brain injury or concussion as comorbid medical conditions, it is possible that this may have been the etiology of some of the baseline laterality findings. After intervention, there were several changes compared to their baseline patterns, including a reduction in connections between the right hemispheric nodes of the salience network and other networks and regions. The use of HIRREM has been associated with significant reduction of self-report symptoms of insomnia,34 persisting symptoms following athletic concussion,35 and perimenopausal symptoms,36 as well as improved objective measurements of autonomic cardiovascular regulation (heart rate variability and baroreflex sensitivity).37 Clinical outcomes associated with application of HIRREM for participants enrolled in the present study included significant improvements in multiple measures of autonomic cardiovascular regulation (SDNN, rMSSD, high frequency, low frequency, and total power, HF Alpha, sequence all, and systolic, diastolic, and mean arterial pressure) and significant reductions in self-reported symptom inventory scores to 6 months following intervention completion (PTSD, insomnia, depression, and anxiety). The PTSD Checklist—Military inventory (PCL-M)38,39 was used to evaluate symptoms of traumatic stress, which was of primary interest for this cohort. Based on the observed clinical changes, a theoretical orientation such as BHAM might predict a corresponding shift toward a more symmetric laterality profile. Because the present study instead assessed the laterality of functional connectivity, the predictions are more tenuous. The current investigation extended the study of brain asymmetries associated with chronic stress by focusing on the lateralization of functional connectivity rather than structural or brain activation asymmetries per se. Participants were recruited from a variety of sources: The Care Coalition, which serves the needs of the Special Operations community, physician referral from military facilities, physician referral from the community, referral from prior participants, or response to posted advertisement. HIRREM SessionsFollowing informed consent, and as part of the enrollment data collection, baseline recordings were initially obtained for each participant in an assessment session of 45 minutes using twochannel, three-minute recordings from at least six paired locations on the scalp (F3/F4, C3/C4, P3/P4, T3/T4, FZ/OZ, O1/O2, FP1/FP2, and CB1/CB2). Recording for each location entailed 1 minute with eyes closed, 1 minute with eyes partially closed, and 1 minute with eyes open and performing cognitive tasks such as recalling numerical stimuli or reading from a passage.Brainwave data from the baseline recordings were used to create individualized protocols for the initial HIRREM sessions, whereas review of data from the prior session was used for subsequent sessions. In these protocols, specific brain frequencies are translated into audible tones in real time that are echoed back to the participant through headphones in as little as 4 microseconds. In these protocols, specific brain frequencies are translated into audible tones in real time that are echoed back to the participant through headphones in as little as 4 microseconds. Some protocols were received with eyes open and others with eyes close, depending mostly upon the function of the lobe being observed based on scalp location during that particular protocol. The majority of the protocols received were with eyes closed to support the brain’s internal regulation and reset. Anatomical images were collected using a Magnetization Prepared Rapid Acquisition Gradient Echo (MPRAGE) sequence. fMRI data were acquired in the axial plane using 187 images with TR = 2,000 ms and voxel dimensions of 4 × 4 × 4 mm with a resulting total scan time of 6 minutes and 14 seconds. The Pearson correlations between the time series for each voxel and every other voxel were calculated. The resulting correlation matrices were thresholded to remove weak links based on formula N = KS where N = number of nodes in the network, K = average degree or number of connections per node in the network, and S = 2.5. Menon’s triple network model of pathology18 highlights alterations in functional connectivity and interactions between the default mode (DMN), salience (SN), and central executive (CEN) networks as key to understanding disturbed psychological and cognitive functioning. AnalysesThe laterality of functional connectivity was assessed first on a whole brain basis, and then in the six different specific networks or regions previously noted. AnalysesThe laterality of functional connectivity was assessed first on a whole brain basis, and then in the six different specific networks or regions previously noted. Subsequent paired t-tests averaging across time showed that there were significantly more contralateral connections than L-L connections in the whole brain data (t(17) = −3.55, P < .01). The attention network was strongly connected to itself ipsilaterally but not contralaterally, the default mode network showed a tendency toward left lateralization, and the salience network showed a tendency toward right lateralization. The attention network was strongly connected to itself ipsilaterally but not contralaterally, the default mode network showed a tendency toward left lateralization, and the salience network showed a tendency toward right lateralization. The attention network was strongly connected to itself ipsilaterally but not contralaterally, the default mode network showed a tendency toward left lateralization, and the salience network showed a tendency toward right lateralization. The attention network was strongly connected to itself ipsilaterally but not contralaterally, the default mode network showed a tendency toward left lateralization, and the salience network showed a tendency toward right lateralization. 