Younger age and parental drinking problems were positively associated with hazardous drinking.In Model 2 (Table 2) we added the number of types of lifetime victimization. Results showed that the pattern of risk associated with sexual identity was similar to Model 1, suggesting that victimization experiences account for only part of the elevated rates of hazardous drinking observed among SMW. The number of victimization types was significantly associated with hazardous drinking for the sample as a whole, with a 20% increase in risk for each additional type of victimization reported (OR=1.20; CI=1.05-1.36).To explore whether victimization in childhood or in adulthood might be more strongly associated with hazardous drinking we also tested models that separated experiences of childhood victimization only, adult victimization only, and revictimization. Victimization experienced only in childhood was not associated with higher odds of hazardous drinking (OR=1.01; CI=0.75-1.36) Age and parental drinking odds were similar to those in the hazardous drinking models.Adding number of types of victimization (Model 2, Table 3) attenuated the OR for depression among bisexual women (from OR=2.9 to OR=1.98), which was no longer statistically significant. Consistent with findings from national probability samples, women in the current study who identified as bisexual reported the highest rates of nearly all of the victimization types and the highest mean number of different types of victimization (x̄= 2.22).2, 21 Rates of victimization and number of victimization types among mostly heterosexual women generally fell between those of exclusively heterosexual women and the other three sexual minority subgroups. Studies that have analyzed data separately for these subgroups have generally found substantial within-group variations. Studies that have analyzed data separately for these subgroups have generally found substantial within-group variations. Despite showing somewhat lower risk of lifetime victimization than the other three sexual minority subgroups, rates of hazardous drinking and depression among mostly heterosexual women were more in line with rates reported by lesbian and bisexual women than those reported by exclusively heterosexual women. Odds for exclusively lesbian women did not differ significantly from those for exclusively heterosexual women on either hazardous drinking or depression, though the estimate for hazardous drinking was nearly significant. Results of the current study also provide strong support for our second hypothesis that the number of types of victimization would be positively associated with hazardous drinking and depression. We hypothesized that (1) SMW will report more types of lifetime victimization and will be more likely to report hazardous drinking and depression than exclusively heterosexual women; (2) greater number of types of victimization will be positively associated with both hazardous drinking and depression; and (3) SMW will remain at higher risk than exclusively heterosexual women for hazardous drinking and depression after controlling for number of types of lifetime victimization. In support of our third hypothesis we found that adding number of victimization types only slightly attenuated the odds of hazardous drinking in each of the four sexual minority subgroups, suggesting that multiple forms of victimization account for only part of the elevated rates of hazardous drinking observed among SMW. Risk of both depression and hazardous drinking were greatest among women who reported both childhood and adult victimization. Risk of both depression and hazardous drinking were greatest among women who reported both childhood and adult victimization. Risk of both depression and hazardous drinking were greatest among women who reported both childhood and adult victimization. Risk of both depression and hazardous drinking were greatest among women who reported both childhood and adult victimization. Risk of both depression and hazardous drinking were greatest among women who reported both childhood and adult victimization. Risk of both depression and hazardous drinking were greatest among women who reported both childhood and adult victimization. In addition, one-half of the bisexual women and the large majority of mostly lesbian and exclusively lesbian women in the study are from the CHLEW, a community-based volunteer sample, whereas very few of the mostly or exclusively lesbian—but all of the mostly heterosexual and exclusively heterosexual women—are from the NSHLEW, a national probability sample. In addition, one-half of the bisexual women and the large majority of mostly lesbian and exclusively lesbian women in the study are from the CHLEW, a community-based volunteer sample, whereas very few of the mostly or exclusively lesbian—but all of the mostly heterosexual and exclusively heterosexual women—are from the NSHLEW, a national probability sample. Thus, our pooling of data from the CHLEW and NSHLEW is both a strength and a limitation of the study. Thus, our pooling of data from the CHLEW and NSHLEW is both a strength and a limitation of the study. Our methods make it possible to compare a hard-to-reach sample with a general population sample—something that is generally difficult to accomplish. However, both the CHLEW and NSHLEW used a well-validated questionnaire designed to be sensitive to women's (including SMW's) lives and experiences. Given previous findings from our work and the work of others indicating that SMW report more severe experiences of childhood abuse than do heterosexual women, research is needed that compares a greater range of victimization experiences and adversities (e.g., discrimination, bullying or harassment, witnessing violence) as well as frequency and severity of victimization experiences among sexual minority and heterosexual women.20, 54, 55 We also recognize that the limitations of our measure of childhood neglect. As such, limitations related to inferences about causality and temporal order must be considered when interpreting results. Study samples and interviewsIn an effort to overcome the challenges of obtaining samples with sufficient numbers of sexual minority subgroup respondents, we pooled data from two studies conducted in 2001 that used similar study methods and interview questionnaires—a strategy recommended by the Institute of Medicine Committee on Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Health Issues and Research Gaps and Opportunities.35National Study of Health and Life Experiences of Women (NSHLEW)The NSHLEW is a 20-year longitudinal study of drinking and problem drinking that surveyed nationally representative samples of adult U.S. women every five years between 1981 and 2001.36 Statistical weighting adjusted for variations in non-response rates by sampling unit and by major demographic characteristics (age, ethnicity, education, and marital status) and for oversampling of heavier drinkers (4 or more drinks/week on average).In the 2001 NSHLEW survey, female interviewers from the National Opinion Research Center conducted face-to-face computer-assisted personal interviews in participants’ homes or other private settings. In addition, one participant identified as “queer” and another preferred not to be labeled; these two participants are not included in the analyses presented here.The CHLEW largely replicated the interview protocol used in the NSHLEW. Such adaptive efforts, in the absence of adequate coping or social support resources, may result in externalizing responses (e.g., substance use/hazardous drinking) and/or internalizing responses (e.g., depression). Ninety minute, face-to-face interviews were conducted by trained female interviewers in the participants’ homes or other private settings. The interview questionnaire was pretested prior to each wave of data collection and refined over time to retain variables with the greatest predictive value. The interview questionnaire was pretested prior to each wave of data collection and refined over time to retain variables with the greatest predictive value. The interview questionnaire was pretested prior to each wave of data collection and refined over time to retain variables with the greatest predictive value. We combined responses to four 12-month indicators of hazardous drinking: (1) heavy episodic drinking, (2) intoxication, (3) adverse drinking consequences and (4) symptoms of potential alcohol dependence. A similar question asked about frequency of subjective intoxication (“drinking enough to feel drunk—where drinking noticeably affected your thinking, talking, and behavior”). Sexual activities prior to 18 were defined as CSA based on Gail Wyatt's work: any intrafamilial sexual activity before age 18 that was unwanted by the participant, or that involved a family member 5 or more years older than the participant; or any extrafamilial sexual activity that occurred before age 18 and was unwanted, or that occurred before age 13 and involved another person five or more years older than the participant.41 Responses were used to create a dichotomous variable indicating whether or not the participant reported experiences that met Wyatt's criteria.Childhood physical abuse (CPA) was measured by asking participants, “When you were growing up, were you physically hurt or injured by your parents or other family members?” Response options were never, rarely, sometimes, often and very often. Sexual activities prior to 18 were defined as CSA based on Gail Wyatt's work: any intrafamilial sexual activity before age 18 that was unwanted by the participant, or that involved a family member 5 or more years older than the participant; or any extrafamilial sexual activity that occurred before age 18 and was unwanted, or that occurred before age 13 and involved another person five or more years older than the participant.41 Responses were used to create a dichotomous variable indicating whether or not the participant reported experiences that met Wyatt's criteria.Childhood physical abuse (CPA) was measured by asking participants, “When you were growing up, were you physically hurt or injured by your parents or other family members?” Response options were never, rarely, sometimes, often and very often. Sexual activities prior to 18 were defined as CSA based on Gail Wyatt's work: any intrafamilial sexual activity before age 18 that was unwanted by the participant, or that involved a family member 5 or more years older than the participant; or any extrafamilial sexual activity that occurred before age 18 and was unwanted, or that occurred before age 13 and involved another person five or more years older than the participant.41 Responses were used to create a dichotomous variable indicating whether or not the participant reported experiences that met Wyatt's criteria.Childhood physical abuse (CPA) was measured by asking participants, “When you were growing up, were you physically hurt or injured by your parents or other family members?” Response options were never, rarely, sometimes, often and very often. Sexual activities prior to 18 were defined as CSA based on Gail Wyatt's work: any intrafamilial sexual activity before age 18 that was unwanted by the participant, or that involved a family member 5 or more years older than the participant; or any extrafamilial sexual activity that occurred before age 18 and was unwanted, or that occurred before age 13 and involved another person five or more years older than the participant.41 Responses were used to create a dichotomous variable indicating whether or not the participant reported experiences that met Wyatt's criteria.Childhood physical abuse (CPA) was measured by asking participants, “When you were growing up, were you physically hurt or injured by your parents or other family members?” Response options were never, rarely, sometimes, often and very often. For example, NSHLEW participants who used descriptors such as “pushed me”, “grabbed me”, “hit me”, “beat me”’, “choked me”, and “kicked me” were coded as having experienced IPV. We employed these weights for all analyses and also introduced variance adjustments to compensate for the NSHLEW's complex design using Taylor series linearization.42 In addition to descriptive analyses, we tested for significant differences in victimization, hazardous drinking and depression rates across the five sexual identity groups. In addition, because victimization in childhood (before age 18) may occur in close proximity to first awareness of same-sex orientation and/or may complicate the sexual identity development process, it is possible that childhood victimization is more strongly associated with negative outcomes than is adult victimization among SMW. In addition, because victimization in childhood (before age 18) may occur in close proximity to first awareness of same-sex orientation and/or may complicate the sexual identity development process, it is possible that childhood victimization is more strongly associated with negative outcomes than is adult victimization among SMW. In addition, because victimization in childhood (before age 18) may occur in close proximity to first awareness of same-sex orientation and/or may complicate the sexual identity development process, it is possible that childhood victimization is more strongly associated with negative outcomes than is adult victimization among SMW. Number of victimization types.Exclusively heterosexual women (x̄=0.94) and mostly heterosexual women (x̄=1.23) reported a lower mean number of types of victimization experiences compared to bisexual (x̄=2.22), mostly lesbian (x̄=1.85), and exclusively lesbian (x̄=1.93) women.Overall, women in the study were more likely to report childhood victimization only (32.3%) than adult victimization only (8.6%); just under one-quarter (24.1%) reported revictimization (both childhood and adult victimization). Multivariate ResultsWe tested a series of logistic regression models to examine the relative risk of hazardous drinking and of depression controlling for demographic characteristics and parental drinking. 