These algorithms are commonly used in the analysis of Medicare data but are known to be less sensitive in identifying diseases than the clinical medical record [39]. These algorithms are commonly used in the analysis of Medicare data but are known to be less sensitive in identifying diseases than the clinical medical record [39]. It is also possible that a higher proportion of chronic conditions that ordinarily do not require frequent medical care would be diagnosed among individuals with HIV who are adherent to care and regularly encounter medical professionals. The temporal relationship between HIV infection and chronic conditions cannot be determined because of the lack of original clinical diagnosis dates. The temporal relationship between HIV infection and chronic conditions cannot be determined because of the lack of original clinical diagnosis dates. The temporal relationship between HIV infection and chronic conditions cannot be determined because of the lack of original clinical diagnosis dates. The temporal relationship between HIV infection and chronic conditions cannot be determined because of the lack of original clinical diagnosis dates. This includes a lack of information on HAART, which is likely to influence chronic condition prevalence for HIV+ beneficiaries. Beneficiaries who had HIV infection and part D Medicare drug coverage will be explored in depth in a future analysis. Beneficiaries who had HIV infection and part D Medicare drug coverage will be explored in depth in a future analysis. There are also concerns that HAART drug regimens may cause damage to the kidneys and liver in certain PLWHIV, and that drug toxicity could interact with age-related declines in organ function [8,9]. There are also concerns that HAART drug regimens may cause damage to the kidneys and liver in certain PLWHIV, and that drug toxicity could interact with age-related declines in organ function [8,9]. The objective of this study is to examine sociodemographic factors and chronic health conditions of PLWHIVaged 65 years and older, and to compare their chronic disease prevalence with beneficiaries without HIV. Beneficiaries were considered to have HIV if they had one inpatient, skilled nursing, or long-term care facility claim with an ICD-9-CM or DRG code indicating HIV; or two claims on different days from other therapy services (part B) or outpatient services with an ICD-9-CM or DRG code indicating HIV over the course of one year. These chronic condition variables are used in numerous publications from both CMS and in the general literature [21,22]. Age was determined on the basis of birthdate and the date of enrollment, with beneficiaries only eligible for inclusion for the years when they were at least 65 years of age. Models for chronic conditions were run both with and without adjustment for variables that are either commonly included in the chronic disease literature, or are known to affect the prevalence of chronic disease; including age, sex, and race/ethnicity, a measure of socioeconomic status, and ESRD [23–25]. In adjusted models, persons with missing values for any adjustment variables were dropped. In adjusted models, persons with missing values for any adjustment variables were dropped. Survival time for PLWHIV has increased significantly since the introduction of HAART in 1996. Survival time for PLWHIV has increased significantly since the introduction of HAART in 1996. PLWHIV were also approximately five times as likely to have the current reason for Medicare enrollment be listed as ESRD, OR 4.77, 95% CI (4.03, 5.66) but were about 60% less likely to die during the time of the study, OR 0.38, 95% CI (0.36, 0.40) (Table 1), a result partially due to the younger age of HIV+ beneficiaries (data not shown). Adjusted risks for these chronic conditions ranged from aOR 1.51, 95% CI (1.47, 1.55) for diabetes to aOR 2.14, 95% CI (2.08, 2.19) for rheumatoid arthritis/osteoarthritis (Table 3). Adjustment factors associated with HIV infection in multivariable models included being male, being of African-American race or Hispanic ethnicity, having ESRD, and dual eligibility for Medicaid and Medicare (Table 3). Adjustment factors that were significant in each of the five individual models of chronic conditions remained significant in the model that considered the number of chronic conditions as an index. Adjustment factors that were significant in each of the five individual models of chronic conditions remained significant in the model that considered the number of chronic conditions as an index. Beneficiaries with HIV infection were also more likely than those without HIV infection to have one or more of the five most common chronic health conditions, increasing the complexity of their medical issues, care, and likelihood of ill health after age 65. As greater numbers of PLWHIV enter Medicare as age-eligible beneficiaries, the majority of their care costs will shift from Medicaid to Medicare [27]. Historically, PLWHIV have entered the Medicare health system as younger persons eligible for Medicare via social security disability benefits. Historically, PLWHIV have entered the Medicare health system as younger persons eligible for Medicare via social security disability benefits. Research has begun to focus on the threats to health of older PLWHIV, both those due to normal aging processes, as well as those due to their HIV infection. Greater collaboration between infectious disease and chronic disease practitioners will be needed to ensure the appropriate medical management of these patients including complex medication regimens [31,32]. Therefore, information on some demographic factors of interest (education level, income), results of clinical tests (viral load tests, CD4+ T-cell tests), and other patient history information (e.g. 