These enzymes act in a sequential manner to activate and transfer ubiquitin to its substrate55 (Box 2, Fig. This is carried out by an E2 heterodimer, Ubc13-Mms2, in complex with another RING-domain containing E3 ligase known as Rad5 in S. cerevisiae34. This is carried out by an E2 heterodimer, Ubc13-Mms2, in complex with another RING-domain containing E3 ligase known as Rad5 in S. cerevisiae34. In humans, K63-linked polyubiquitination of PCNA appears to involve two E3 ubiquitin ligases, HLTF (helicase-like transcription factor)40,43 and SHPRH (SNF2 histone linker PHD RING helicase)41,42. These lesions must be repaired or bypassed in order to complete DNA replication. These lesions must be repaired or bypassed in order to complete DNA replication. These lesions must be repaired or bypassed in order to complete DNA replication. Moreover, overexpression of either protein in human cells leads to increased PCNA polyubiquitination in vivo40,42,43. Several observations are consistent with this idea58–60. Several observations are consistent with this idea58–60. Indeed, overexpression of HLTF or SHPRH together with the E2, Ubc13-Mms2, leads to more efficient polyubiquitination43. The idea that SHPRH and HLTF might have other functions is consistent with the structure of these proteins, which is more complex than a simple RING-finger-containing protein (Fig. The idea that SHPRH and HLTF might have other functions is consistent with the structure of these proteins, which is more complex than a simple RING-finger-containing protein (Fig. The idea that SHPRH and HLTF might have other functions is consistent with the structure of these proteins, which is more complex than a simple RING-finger-containing protein (Fig. The idea that SHPRH and HLTF might have other functions is consistent with the structure of these proteins, which is more complex than a simple RING-finger-containing protein (Fig. The idea that SHPRH and HLTF might have other functions is consistent with the structure of these proteins, which is more complex than a simple RING-finger-containing protein (Fig. Whether any or all of these helicase activities are important for DNA damage tolerance and whether HLTF and SHPRH also have helicase activity is not yet clear. A PHD (plant homeodomain) finger motif found in SHPRH has been shown to recognize specific methyl-lysine residues in histone tails as well phosphoinositides71. Further, the PHD finger is known to function as a ligase for both ubiquitin and SUMO72. Moreover, when ssDNA formation at the fork is blocked by preventing helicase-polymerase uncoupling, PCNA ubiquitination does not occur36. More relevant perhaps is the finding that Rad18 is recruited to ssDNA by replication protein A (RPA)74, a ssDNA binding protein that coats DNA during replication and accumulates at stalled forks79. More relevant perhaps is the finding that Rad18 is recruited to ssDNA by replication protein A (RPA)74, a ssDNA binding protein that coats DNA during replication and accumulates at stalled forks79. What then triggers the switch from mono- to polyubiquitination of PCNA and, by extension, translesion synthesis to template switching? What then triggers the switch from mono- to polyubiquitination of PCNA and, by extension, translesion synthesis to template switching? Based on this and other observations, the interaction between Rad5 and Rad18 has been hypothesized to coordinate the switch from mono- to polyubiquitination of PCNA through a physical coupling of the two sets of ubiquitin enzymes56. Despite similarities in the structure of the activating signal, ATR function is not required for PCNA ubiquitination in yeast32,74 or Xenopus laevis35,36 and most studies in human cells are consistent with this idea44,51,81. It is also worth noting that Rad1885 and possibly also HLTF and SHPRH may be substrates of the checkpoint kinases. In contrast, the lesion is avoided during template switching by using an alternate (undamaged) DNA template, and as such this process is error-free. In contrast, the lesion is avoided during template switching by using an alternate (undamaged) DNA template, and as such this process is error-free. In contrast, the lesion is avoided during template switching by using an alternate (undamaged) DNA template, and as such this process is error-free. Proper regulation of DNA damage tolerance and mutagenic DNA synthesis is essential for maintaining genome stability. Proper regulation of DNA damage tolerance and mutagenic DNA synthesis is essential for maintaining genome stability. It is also not clear how the different TLS polymerases are paired with a lesion if TLS polymerases are recruited by the monoubiquitinated form of PCNA, how is the most appropriate polymerase chosen? The trimeric nature of this protein raises the possibility that each of the three subunits could undergo a different modification to coordinate processive DNA replication, translesion synthesis, and template switching. We have virtually no understanding of the key players and events involved in this error-free mode of lesion bypass, and this “black box” of DNA damage tolerance is sure to keep many researchers busy in the years to come. Functional read-outs are also crude and non-specific, relying solely on changes in mutation frequency without any way to distinguish between accurate translesion synthesis events and template switching. The discovery of pro-mutagenic enzymes and PCNA’s role in directing DNA damage tolerance has opened up new and exciting avenues of research. The discovery of pro-mutagenic enzymes and PCNA’s role in directing DNA damage tolerance has opened up new and exciting avenues of research. The discovery of pro-mutagenic enzymes and PCNA’s role in directing DNA damage tolerance has opened up new and exciting avenues of research. Members of this family include Polη, Polι, Polκ and Rev1, each of which can bypass different lesions in vitro. Members of this family include Polη, Polι, Polκ and Rev1, each of which can bypass different lesions in vitro. Members of this family include Polη, Polι, Polκ and Rev1, each of which can bypass different lesions in vitro. Box 2: Ubuqitin conjugation pathwayUbiquitination is a highly conserved process comprised of three concerted reactions55 (Fig. Box 2: Ubuqitin conjugation pathwayUbiquitination is a highly conserved process comprised of three concerted reactions55 (Fig. The ubiquitin is then transferred to an active site cysteine residue on a ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme (E2). The E3 completes the transfer of ubiquitin to its designated substrate; conjugation occurs by formation of an isopeptide bond between the C-terminal glycine residue of ubiquitin and the ε-amino group of a lysine residue on the target protein. In addition, polyubiquitin chains can be heterogeneous, containing mixed linkages and of varying lengths, adding to the complexity and diversity of ubiquitin-mediated signaling87. Conjugation of other protein modifiers such as SUMO occurs in a manner analogous to that of ubiquitin86. Error-prone and error-free modes of DNA damage tolerance Unlike the high-fidelity DNA polymerases, low-fidelity or TLS polymerases are non-processive, lack any proofreading capability, and contain larger active sites capable of accommodating distorted bases and base pair mismatches7–9 (Fig. Unlike the high-fidelity DNA polymerases, low-fidelity or TLS polymerases are non-processive, lack any proofreading capability, and contain larger active sites capable of accommodating distorted bases and base pair mismatches7–9 (Fig. Evolutionarily speaking, mutagenesis is the mechanism through which natural selection acts, and it is the basis for adaptation and species diversification. As the name implies, template switching is hypothesized to mediate lesion bypass by temporarily replacing the lesion-containing DNA template with an undamaged template, namely the newly synthesized daughter strand of the sister duplex. As the name implies, template switching is hypothesized to mediate lesion bypass by temporarily replacing the lesion-containing DNA template with an undamaged template, namely the newly synthesized daughter strand of the sister duplex. As the name implies, template switching is hypothesized to mediate lesion bypass by temporarily replacing the lesion-containing DNA template with an undamaged template, namely the newly synthesized daughter strand of the sister duplex. As the name implies, template switching is hypothesized to mediate lesion bypass by temporarily replacing the lesion-containing DNA template with an undamaged template, namely the newly synthesized daughter strand of the sister duplex. Of particular importance is the sequential manner in which PCNA ubiquitination occurs. Importantly, PCNA is polyubiquitinated through K63-linked chains22,34,43, and neither mono- nor polyubiquitination of PCNA appears to promote its degradation. One possibility is that bypass is coupled with ongoing replication and occurs immediately after encounter of the lesion by the replication fork. Polκ has also been shown to interact with Rad1844, indicating that this may also be a more general mechanism. Thus, there may be at least three binding interactions that regulate TLS recruitment to stalled forks (Fig. Thus, there may be at least three binding interactions that regulate TLS recruitment to stalled forks (Fig. Thus, there may be at least three binding interactions that regulate TLS recruitment to stalled forks (Fig. Thus, there may be at least three binding interactions that regulate TLS recruitment to stalled forks (Fig. Thus, there may be at least three binding interactions that regulate TLS recruitment to stalled forks (Fig. Thus, there may be at least three binding interactions that regulate TLS recruitment to stalled forks (Fig. Another potentially important set of interactions involves Rev1, a TLS polymerase recently shown to bind ssDNA and primer termini53. Another potentially important set of interactions involves Rev1, a TLS polymerase recently shown to bind ssDNA and primer termini53. One possibility is that the polyubiquitin chains prevent TLS. The ubiquitination of PCNA requires the proper coordination and assembly of a number of enzymes. 