Because of the frequent perturbation of ion homeostasis due to constant neuronal activity, the workload of NKA is so high that it consumes nearly half of the ATP in the brain. Using rat cortex lysates, antibodies against NKA α1, but not α3 or β subunits, co-immunoprecipitated AMPARs (Figure 1E), indicating a specific association of NKA α1 subunit with AMPARs. To test this, brain lysate was incubated with GST fusion protein of GluR C-terminals. NKA inhibition causes a reduction in AMPAR abundanceDuring synaptic transmission, activation of glutamate receptors, including AMPARs and NMDARs, allows ions to flow in and out of the dendritic spines, leading to altered ion gradients that need to be efficiently reset by NKA. Under this concentration even 24 h treatment only induces about 15% cell death (Xiao et al , 2002). Under this concentration even 24 h treatment only induces about 15% cell death (Xiao et al , 2002). Under this concentration even 24 h treatment only induces about 15% cell death (Xiao et al , 2002). To distinguish between these possibilities, we first inhibited protein synthesis. In addition to lysosomal pathway, proteins can also be degraded by proteasome, during which target protein molecules are usually conjugated with ubiquitin and then transferred to proteasome for ATP-dependent degradation. Consistent with biochemical results, a marked reduction in GluR1 immunointensity was observed across the cell. Rather, they were more likely degraded by proteasomes localized in the spine (Bingol and Schuman, 2006). A decrease in fluorescence intensity was observed at both the soma and the dendrites, with a higher rate at the dendritic region. A decrease in fluorescence intensity was observed at both the soma and the dendrites, with a higher rate at the dendritic region. The frequent and often large rises of intraspinal sodium must be exuded efficiently in order to maintain synapse electrophysiology, a task achieved via the activity of NKA. We therefore incubated neurons with veratridine (20 μM) in normal ACSF to allow inward flow of sodium. We therefore incubated neurons with veratridine (20 μM) in normal ACSF to allow inward flow of sodium. We therefore incubated neurons with veratridine (20 μM) in normal ACSF to allow inward flow of sodium. We found that when neurons were treated with ouabain in the presence of KB-R7943 (10 μM), an inhibitor that only blocks the reversed mode of NCX (Sheldon et al , 2004; Kim et al , 2007), the ouabain-induced AMPAR degradation remained (KB, 109% ± 5%, n=3, p>0.05; KB+ouabain, 47% ± 2%, n=3, p<0.05) (Fig. For instance, lack of calcium will suppress transmitter release and glutamate receptor activity, leading to diminished loading of intracellular sodium thereby blocking the ouabain effect. We found that in the absence of calcium veratridine incubation still induced a significant reduction of GluR1 amount (n=4, Fig. 5A and 5B), suggesting that voltage-gated sodium channels may not be the major contributor for intracellular sodium rise. Glutamatergic receptors are activated upon binding of glutamate that is released during active synaptic transmission by action potentials, or during resting conditions through random vesicle fusion with the presynaptic membrane resulting in miniature postsynaptic currents (mEPSCs) (Liao et al , 2001; Lu et al , 2001; Man et al , 2003; Rumbaugh et al , 2003). Glutamatergic receptors are activated upon binding of glutamate that is released during active synaptic transmission by action potentials, or during resting conditions through random vesicle fusion with the presynaptic membrane resulting in miniature postsynaptic currents (mEPSCs) (Liao et al , 2001; Lu et al , 2001; Man et al , 2003; Rumbaugh et al , 2003). Glutamatergic receptors are activated upon binding of glutamate that is released during active synaptic transmission by action potentials, or during resting conditions through random vesicle fusion with the presynaptic membrane resulting in miniature postsynaptic currents (mEPSCs) (Liao et al , 2001; Lu et al , 2001; Man et al , 2003; Rumbaugh et al , 2003). Glutamatergic receptors are activated upon binding of glutamate that is released during active synaptic transmission by action potentials, or during resting conditions through random vesicle fusion with the presynaptic membrane resulting in miniature postsynaptic currents (mEPSCs) (Liao et al , 2001; Lu et al , 2001; Man et al , 2003; Rumbaugh et al , 2003). Glutamatergic receptors are activated upon binding of glutamate that is released during active synaptic transmission by action potentials, or during resting conditions through random vesicle fusion with the presynaptic membrane resulting in miniature postsynaptic currents (mEPSCs) (Liao et al , 2001; Lu et al , 2001; Man et al , 2003; Rumbaugh et al , 2003). To ensure blockade, drugs were given 15 min prior to the addition of ouabain. To ensure blockade, drugs were given 15 min prior to the addition of ouabain. To ensure blockade, drugs were given 15 min prior to the addition of ouabain. Similar results were also obtained using surface biotinylation assays (Fig. Similar results were also obtained using surface biotinylation assays (Fig. Neurons were counted and plated onto poly-L-lysine (Sigma, 0.5mg/ml) pre-coated 60 mm Petri dishes (Becton Dickinson, Bedford, MA) at 4×106/dish for biochemistry or dishes containing five coverslips (0.3×106 per 60 mm dish) for immunostainings. 6E), indicating that AMPARs are first endocytosed, then sorted for proteolysis. Dried coverslips were then baked at 200°C for 2 hours, coated with poly-L-lysine (Sigma, 0.5mg/ml) overnight and washed again before being incubated in plating medium for cell plating. NKA inhibition induces long-lasting depression of AMPAR-mediated synaptic transmissionWe found that NKA inhibition induces a reduction of surface-localized AMPARs. Neurons were recorded in ACSF supplemented with TTX (1 μM) to block action potentials, APV (50 μM) and bicuculline (20 μM) to block NMDARs and GABAA receptor, respectively. When mEPSC amplitude histograms were compared, we observed a rise of the small and a concomitant drop of the moderate larger mEPSCs, but no significant changes to the extreme ends of the spectrum (Fig. When mEPSC amplitude histograms were compared, we observed a rise of the small and a concomitant drop of the moderate larger mEPSCs, but no significant changes to the extreme ends of the spectrum (Fig. When mEPSC amplitude histograms were compared, we observed a rise of the small and a concomitant drop of the moderate larger mEPSCs, but no significant changes to the extreme ends of the spectrum (Fig. When mEPSC amplitude histograms were compared, we observed a rise of the small and a concomitant drop of the moderate larger mEPSCs, but no significant changes to the extreme ends of the spectrum (Fig. 24 hrs after plating, the culture medium was completely replaced with feeding medium (Neurobasal medium supplemented with 1% HS, 2% B-27 and 1% P/S/G). Physical association and functional coupling between NKA and AMPARsOur data demonstrate a novel regulation in AMPAR synaptic localization and stability by NKA activity. Physical association and functional coupling between NKA and AMPARsOur data demonstrate a novel regulation in AMPAR synaptic localization and stability by NKA activity. The molecular mechanisms that serve the synaptic localization of NKA are not clear, but is could be achieved by interaction of NKA with synaptic molecules including PSD scaffolding proteins or glutamate receptors. We show that NKA inhibition by ouabain or other means including potassium-free conditions and agrin causes AMPAR internalization and subsequent degradation. Given the importance of the sodium gradient for proper functioning of ion channels including glutamate receptors, a functional coupling of NKA and ionotropic glutamate receptors is presumably a necessary cellular device for synapse physiology. At the single synapse level, if NKA can act as a determinant of synaptic strength via regulating synaptic AMPAR numbers, specific synaptic plasticity may be achieved through regulating the release of NKA ligands such as neuronal agrin at the presynaptic sites (O'Connor et al , 1995), whereas diffusively released or circulating NKA ligands may trigger global homeostatic plasticity across all synapses (Turrigiano and Nelson, 2004). At the single synapse level, if NKA can act as a determinant of synaptic strength via regulating synaptic AMPAR numbers, specific synaptic plasticity may be achieved through regulating the release of NKA ligands such as neuronal agrin at the presynaptic sites (O'Connor et al , 1995), whereas diffusively released or circulating NKA ligands may trigger global homeostatic plasticity across all synapses (Turrigiano and Nelson, 2004). At the single synapse level, if NKA can act as a determinant of synaptic strength via regulating synaptic AMPAR numbers, specific synaptic plasticity may be achieved through regulating the release of NKA ligands such as neuronal agrin at the presynaptic sites (O'Connor et al , 1995), whereas diffusively released or circulating NKA ligands may trigger global homeostatic plasticity across all synapses (Turrigiano and Nelson, 2004). At the single synapse level, if NKA can act as a determinant of synaptic strength via regulating synaptic AMPAR numbers, specific synaptic plasticity may be achieved through regulating the release of NKA ligands such as neuronal agrin at the presynaptic sites (O'Connor et al , 1995), whereas diffusively released or circulating NKA ligands may trigger global homeostatic plasticity across all synapses (Turrigiano and Nelson, 2004). At the single synapse level, if NKA can act as a determinant of synaptic strength via regulating synaptic AMPAR numbers, specific synaptic plasticity may be achieved through regulating the release of NKA ligands such as neuronal agrin at the presynaptic sites (O'Connor et al , 1995), whereas diffusively released or circulating NKA ligands may trigger global homeostatic plasticity across all synapses (Turrigiano and Nelson, 2004). At the single synapse level, if NKA can act as a determinant of synaptic strength via regulating synaptic AMPAR numbers, specific synaptic plasticity may be achieved through regulating the release of NKA ligands such as neuronal agrin at the presynaptic sites (O'Connor et al , 1995), whereas diffusively released or circulating NKA ligands may trigger global homeostatic plasticity across all synapses (Turrigiano and Nelson, 2004). It is intriguing to note that the AP2 binding domain contains three lysine residues as potential ubiquitination targets. Ouabain is therefore now regarded as an endogenous steroid hormone circulating the body and the nervous system (Schoner, 2000, 2002). Therefore, through changing postsynaptic AMPAR turnover, activity-dependent agrin release may serve as a novel mechanism for synaptic plasticity.As the primary energy user consuming half of the ATP in the brain, NKA activity is highly sensitive to ATP levels. After treatment cells were rinsed with ACSF, harvested in ice-cold lysis buffer (PBS supplemented with 1% triton X-100, 0.5% deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS and 1:300 protease inhibitor cocktail containing AEBSF, Aprotinin, Bedysyin, E-64, Leupeptin and Pepstatin A, Sigma), and rotated at 4°C for 1 hr. After treatment cells were rinsed with ACSF, harvested in ice-cold lysis buffer (PBS supplemented with 1% triton X-100, 0.5% deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS and 1:300 protease inhibitor cocktail containing AEBSF, Aprotinin, Bedysyin, E-64, Leupeptin and Pepstatin A, Sigma), and rotated at 4°C for 1 hr. The process by which sodium triggers proteolytic cascade remains unknown. Alternatively, sodium accumulation may induce calcium release from intracellular stores, which then subsequently leads to receptor degradation. Films were scanned and the optical intensities of the protein bands were quantified using Image-J NIH software. After treatment, plates were washed, incubated with anti-GluR1N (1:100) for 10 min at 37°C and washed with ACSF on ice to remove the remaining antibody. Image collection on immunolabeled neuronsImmunostained coverslips were mounted onto slides using ProlongGold anti-fade reagent (Invitrogen, Molecular Probe) and kept in the dark for more than 4 hrs before imaging. The exposure time for fluorescence signal was set automatically by the software and adjusted manually so that the signal intensity was within the full dynamic range. Either the glow scale look-up table or the histogram was used to monitor the saturation level. Two channels were imaged sequentially and a merged image was formed automatically by the Zeiss imaging software. Some immunostainings were also imaged by confocal microscopy. Fluorescence intensity at the soma was measured at different time points using Image-J and normalized to the starting value. Recordings started 10 min after establishing whole-cell configuration to ensure equilibration between the pipette solution and the cytosol. Recordings started 10 min after establishing whole-cell configuration to ensure equilibration between the pipette solution and the cytosol. Recordings started 10 min after establishing whole-cell configuration to ensure equilibration between the pipette solution and the cytosol. Recordings started 10 min after establishing whole-cell configuration to ensure equilibration between the pipette solution and the cytosol. Notably, NKA showed a non-uniform, punctate pattern in dendrites, reminiscent of synaptic distribution. Notably, NKA showed a non-uniform, punctate pattern in dendrites, reminiscent of synaptic distribution. Because AMPARs, the primary mediator of excitatory synaptic transmission, are a major contributor of intraspinal sodium transients, we reasoned that NKA should be intimately positioned with AMPARs in order to facilitate local sodium homeostasis. 