In brief, the study compared implementation strategies provided at sites which offered LG-CC to patients diagnosed with bipolar disorder and who were able and willing to provide informed consent to complete assessments. In brief, the study compared implementation strategies provided at sites which offered LG-CC to patients diagnosed with bipolar disorder and who were able and willing to provide informed consent to complete assessments. In brief, the study compared implementation strategies provided at sites which offered LG-CC to patients diagnosed with bipolar disorder and who were able and willing to provide informed consent to complete assessments. LG-CC is an evidence-based CCM (9) that included four weekly self-management sessions focused on managing depressive and bipolar symptoms that occurred during the first month, and ongoing telephone-based care management contacts occurring up to 6 months after patient enrollment that were implemented by clinical social workers at each site. Providers from participating clinics received an LG-CC toolkit and training, but were randomized at the clinic level to receive either additional coaching via proactive, regular contacts to address barriers to LG-CC uptake (10) or as-needed technical support. Of the 385 study participants with complete baseline surveys, 139 did not complete the 12-month survey. Of those who completed both surveys, 27 had either missing outcome or covariate data. The mean physical health component score (PCS-12) from the Short Form-12 health-related quality of life assessment was 36.3±7.3, the mean AUDIT-C score was 1.2±2.1 and the mean number of comorbidities was 1.6±1.2. CCMs are typically implemented by a clinical nurse or social worker (care manager) who provides individual self-management support, coordinates care between providers (care management), completes outcomes assessments, and links patients to specialists in collaboration with the individual’s physician. Because homelessness history was associated with missingness, it is possible that those with a history of homelessness who needed to be seen in the emergency department were more likely to have participated in the 12-month survey than those with a history of homelessness who did not need ED visits. Perhaps these individuals may have had more unmet health services needs that were not observed in the study assessments. Perhaps these individuals may have had more unmet health services needs that were not observed in the study assessments. Perhaps these individuals may have had more unmet health services needs that were not observed in the study assessments. The primary utilization measure was based on participant self-report and not verifiable with actual utilization data from electronic medical records or claims. The increased desire by health care payers to promote more efficient care has led to a growing desire to implement more proactive models of care to better manage patients with chronic physical and mental health conditions. These individuals may have unmet service needs that require additional management beyond standard care management. Future studies may also require the further intensification of evidence-based Collaborative Care Models for individuals with serious mental illness in order to potentially mitigate critical service encounters and improve outcomes. 