These more local PET hypointensities commonly corresponded to low ASL signal within that ROI, driving the CBF dynamic range of Figure 4; we would anticipate even stronger correlations with finer ROI scales. We compared CBF measurements with multiple ASL techniques against the PET reference standard in patients with Moyamoya disease under simultaneous conditions. LLLD ASL showed the least bias in rCBF values compared with PET, enabling reliable CBF assessment even in areas of severe Tmax delay. Exclusion criteria included known allergies to sulfa drugs or contrast agent, impaired renal function that would preclude administration of contrast agent, or any contraindication to MRI. The study was performed in compliance with the Stanford University Institutional Review Board, and all patients provided written informed consent before the study. PET/MRI AcquisitionAll images were acquired on a simultaneous time-of-flight enabled 3.0 Tesla PET/MRI system (Signa, GE Healthcare, Waukesha, WI). PET reconstruction was performed with a TOF-OSEM algorithm (time-of-flight ordered subset expectation maximization; 4 iterations and 28 subsets) on a 192×192 matrix, 30 cm field-of view, 2.78 mm slice thickness, and included correction for scatter, random counts, dead time, and point-spread function. PET reconstruction was performed with a TOF-OSEM algorithm (time-of-flight ordered subset expectation maximization; 4 iterations and 28 subsets) on a 192×192 matrix, 30 cm field-of view, 2.78 mm slice thickness, and included correction for scatter, random counts, dead time, and point-spread function. The labeling duration (LD) and PLD times of the standard-delay ASL scan were chosen based on recent consensus values for clinical patients, with LD/PLD of 1.5/2.0 seconds.11 The multidelay ASL scan consisted of a slightly longer LD duration (2 seconds) and included 5 PLD times between 0.7 and 3.0 seconds, enabling measurement of and correction for ATT. DSC MRI was performed using 0.1 mmol/kg of gadolinium contrast injected at 4 mL/s at the end of the study. where ΔM represents the perfusion difference signal, and M0 represents the fully relaxed, equilibrium tissue magnetization based on a saturation recovery image acquired with saturation time=2000 ms. T1a=1650 ms is the assumed relaxation time for arterial blood, and λ=0.9 is the average partition coefficient in the brain. where ΔM represents the perfusion difference signal, and M0 represents the fully relaxed, equilibrium tissue magnetization based on a saturation recovery image acquired with saturation time=2000 ms. T1a=1650 ms is the assumed relaxation time for arterial blood, and λ=0.9 is the average partition coefficient in the brain. where ΔM represents the perfusion difference signal, and M0 represents the fully relaxed, equilibrium tissue magnetization based on a saturation recovery image acquired with saturation time=2000 ms. T1a=1650 ms is the assumed relaxation time for arterial blood, and λ=0.9 is the average partition coefficient in the brain. where ΔM represents the perfusion difference signal, and M0 represents the fully relaxed, equilibrium tissue magnetization based on a saturation recovery image acquired with saturation time=2000 ms. T1a=1650 ms is the assumed relaxation time for arterial blood, and λ=0.9 is the average partition coefficient in the brain. In areas of prolonged Tmax, standard-delay ASL showed areas of underestimation and overestimation relative to the PET scan. Dynamic susceptibility contrast (DSC) MRI has also been used to evaluate CBF abnormalities7 and surgical revascularization in Moyamoya disease.8,9 However, DSC requires administration of an exogeneous tracer, and the input function is difficult to estimate in the presence of long transit delays and dispersion.8 These effects limit the accuracy of DSC perfusion maps and may confound the interpretation of hemodynamic changes observed after surgery or during a vasodilatory challenge. This study evaluated the accuracy of several ASL MRI acquisitions to measure cerebral perfusion in patients with Moyamoya disease compared with reference [15O]-water PET scans acquired simultaneously on a hybrid system. These regions have long transit delays relative to the PLD, leading to artificially low ASL signal that is a known confounder in highly collateralized brain regions.13 More recently, Hara et al23 observed that ASL with a single PLD of 2.5 seconds, which is similar to our standard PLD, outperformed ASL with a shorter PLD of 1.5 seconds in areas of Moyamoya disease (Tmax > 6 seconds). ASL scans with PLD of 2 seconds have also shown local CBF hyper-intensities that likely correspond to collateral flow with long transit times,24 and we observed similar hyperintense, intravascular signal in our standard-delay ASL scans (Figure 1). ASL scans with PLD of 2 seconds have also shown local CBF hyper-intensities that likely correspond to collateral flow with long transit times,24 and we observed similar hyperintense, intravascular signal in our standard-delay ASL scans (Figure 1). Previous work found that multidelay ASL more strongly correlated with computed tomographic perfusion than single-delay ASL (PLD of 2 seconds) in Moyamoya patients.25 Two-compartment modeling of multidelay ASL26 has shown 27% longer ATT’s in the affected side compared with the contralateral side, similar to the 31% ATT elevation we observed in regions with moderate Tmax. Our findings suggest that an optimal ASL protocol with longer PLD is necessary for accurate cortical CBF assessment in Moyamoya patients. This observation may reflect earlier blood arrival combined with faster T1 relaxation in the tissue compared with the blood, which leads to underestimation of both ATT and CBF in early-arrival regions at longer PLDs.17 It may also help explain why LLLD ASL did not perform as well as multidelay ASL in cases of moderate Tmax. Regional analysis in this study used regions of interest (ROIs) based on the ASPECTS scoring system because it is well established for evaluation of cerebral ischemia and delineates cortical perfusion territories that are relevant to assessment of cerebrovascular disease. Regional analysis in this study used regions of interest (ROIs) based on the ASPECTS scoring system because it is well established for evaluation of cerebral ischemia and delineates cortical perfusion territories that are relevant to assessment of cerebrovascular disease. Regional analysis in this study used regions of interest (ROIs) based on the ASPECTS scoring system because it is well established for evaluation of cerebral ischemia and delineates cortical perfusion territories that are relevant to assessment of cerebrovascular disease. 