The procedure used for obtaining consent was institutional review board approved and included standard components such as a description of the project, its purpose, the voluntary nature of participation, and issues pertaining to confidentiality. Scores on these tasks were standardized and then averaged (α = 0.86). Notably, the direction of the scores is consistent with the original labels, meaning that higher scores on impulsivity reflect less self-regulation, and lower scores on high-level EF indicate more self-regulation.Friendship quality.As a step toward better understanding low-income children’s friendship quality in the context of a larger survey study at T3, we asked children to rate six statements such as “my best friend would always stick up for me” and “my best friend and I make each other feel important and special.” Five of the six items were from the validation and caring subscale of the Friendship Quality Questionnaire (Parker & Asher, 1993). Participation in each of the activities was coded as a 1, and no participation in each activity was coded as a 0. Participation in each of the activities was coded as a 1, and no participation in each activity was coded as a 0. Based on a metric ranging from 0 (not true) to 2 (very true or often true), teachers rated how true each item was at the time or within the past 2 months. Regarding family characteristics, we included whether households were led by a single parent and families’ income-to-needs ratio, which was the household income divided by the poverty threshold. Furthermore, we use Nigg’s (2017) framework in our conceptualization of the following specific self-regulation constructs: executive function, effortful control, and impulsivity. Whereas the Baron and Kenny method detects an indirect effect by a reduction in size of the direct path after a mediator is added to a model, bootstrapping estimates an indirect-effect standard error that provides a criterion for statistical significance (MacKinnon, Lockwood, Hoffman, West, & Sheets, 2002; Preacher & Hayes, 2004). The arrows on the left represent path A, where self-regulation in preschool was estimated as a predictor of self-regulation at school age. In Figure 2, this association is significant in the mediation model predicting teacher reports of promotive factors (b = −0.06, SE = 0.03, p < .05). In Figure 2, this association is significant in the mediation model predicting teacher reports of promotive factors (b = −0.06, SE = 0.03, p < .05). In Figure 4, the statistics for path A were the same in mediation models predicting hyperactivity and inattention (b = −0.07, SE = 0.02, p < .01). This involves both lower-level EF, with components such as working memory (e.g., combination of short-term memory and focused attention), which occurs within a short temporal window (e.g., minutes), and higher-level EF, such as planning, which occurs within a longer time frame (e.g., hours or longer; Nigg, 2017). The standardized coefficients for these links were −0.19 for friendship quality (b = −0.61, SE = 0.23, p < .01), −0.14 for parent-reported cumulative promotive factors (b = −0.98, SE = 0.48, p < .05), and −0.33 for teacher-reported cumulative promotive factors (b = −1.53, SE = 0.33, p < .001). The standardized coefficient was −0.22 for social withdrawal and 0.53 for hyperactivity. The standardized coefficient was −0.22 for social withdrawal and 0.53 for hyperactivity. The standardized coefficient was −0.22 for social withdrawal and 0.53 for hyperactivity. Indirect EffectsLastly, when tests of indirect effects yielded significant results, we noted this in Figures 2–4. Indirect EffectsLastly, when tests of indirect effects yielded significant results, we noted this in Figures 2–4. The standardized coefficients for these indirect effects were 0.05 and 0.07, respectively.Figure 3 shows that there were mediating pathways from EC at baseline to anxiety and social withdrawal at T3 through high-level EF at T2. The standardized coefficients for these indirect effects were 0.05 and 0.07, respectively.Figure 3 shows that there were mediating pathways from EC at baseline to anxiety and social withdrawal at T3 through high-level EF at T2. The standardized coefficients for these indirect effects were 0.05 and 0.07, respectively.Figure 3 shows that there were mediating pathways from EC at baseline to anxiety and social withdrawal at T3 through high-level EF at T2. There was an indirect effect for anxiety (b = −0.01, 95% CI [−0.022, −0.001]). The standardized coefficient for this indirect effect was −0.06. In terms of a standardized coefficient, this indirect effect was −0.10. Additionally, our findings help bridge separate literatures on different self-regulation constructs (Nigg, 2017), and our results add to the existing literature, which has not extensively examined various self-regulation constructs during the transition from early to middle childhood. More experience with delaying gratification may provide young children with greater opportunity to internalize self-regulation strategies. More experience with delaying gratification may provide young children with greater opportunity to internalize self-regulation strategies. It could be that EC, with its roots in temperament, may be especially salient for the number of friends that children make (i.e., popularity; Eisenberg et al , 2011), but that EF, and its role in social information processing, is particularly important for the way in which friends relate to one another (i.e., quality of friendship; Holmes et al , 2016). It could be that EC, with its roots in temperament, may be especially salient for the number of friends that children make (i.e., popularity; Eisenberg et al , 2011), but that EF, and its role in social information processing, is particularly important for the way in which friends relate to one another (i.e., quality of friendship; Holmes et al , 2016). Like lower-level EF, the temporal focus for EC (e.g., waiting 1 minute to open a gift) is more immediate. In turn, better social interaction may help children engage in numerous promotive activities.Furthermore, high-level EF in middle childhood predicted fewer behavior problems where there were links to anxiety, relations to social withdrawal, and associations with inattention. However, it could be that both lower impulsivity and greater social withdrawal are part of a larger overcontrolled regulatory system (Murray & Kochanska, 2002). However, it could be that both lower impulsivity and greater social withdrawal are part of a larger overcontrolled regulatory system (Murray & Kochanska, 2002). For example, the current study found that EC was salient during early childhood and that high-level EF was important during middle childhood for better friendship quality, more promotive factors, and fewer behavior problems. These results speak to how various types of self-regulation may help children respond to differing contextual demands (Liew et al , 2004). These results speak to how various types of self-regulation may help children respond to differing contextual demands (Liew et al , 2004). These results speak to how various types of self-regulation may help children respond to differing contextual demands (Liew et al , 2004). These results speak to how various types of self-regulation may help children respond to differing contextual demands (Liew et al , 2004). Future research on other types of self-regulation across early and middle childhood is needed. Expanding the literature in such directions may advance our understanding of the roots of overall social adjustment and inform efforts to help not only low-income, ethnic minority children, but children from various economic and ethnic backgrounds who each face opportunities and challenges during middle childhood. In contrast to EC, but like EF, impulsivity can involve a longer time frame (e.g., choosing an immediate reward over a delayed reward with a wait time of an hour or longer). Links Across Self-Regulation Constructs During Early and Middle Childhood To our knowledge, the existing literature on children’s self-regulation tends to focus on self-regulatory processes within early childhood rather than across early and middle childhood. Previous research has rarely tested for longitudinal relations across different types of self-regulation during early and middle childhood (Harms, Zayas, Meltzoff, & Carlson, 2014; Raver, McCoy, & Lowenstein, 2013), although this would help clarify the use of different types of self-regulatory terms (Jones, Bailey, Barnes, & Partee, 2016; Morrison & Grammer, 2016; Nigg, 2017). Links among various self-regulation constructs over time may take multiple forms. Links among various self-regulation constructs over time may take multiple forms. Links among various self-regulation constructs over time may take multiple forms. Longitudinal links have been found between EF assessments across early childhood (Raver et al , 2013) and across early and middle childhood (Friedman et al , 2014). Still, largely absent from the extant literature is investigation of associations from lower-level EF in preschool to higher-level EF during middle childhood in the context of more rigorous models that include multiple measures of self-regulation, control for a wide range of demographic characteristics, and are estimated among low-income, ethnic minority children (Jones et al , 2016; Morrison & Grammer). This is a notable gap to fill given that demographic factors such as having lower household income have been identified as risk factors for lower self-regulation (Raver et al , 2013). This is a notable gap to fill given that demographic factors such as having lower household income have been identified as risk factors for lower self-regulation (Raver et al , 2013). This is a notable gap to fill given that demographic factors such as having lower household income have been identified as risk factors for lower self-regulation (Raver et al , 2013). We aim to expand knowledge on the benefits of self-regulation by investigating high-level EF and impulsivity in middle childhood as predictors of three aspects of social development. Here, we take a first step at examining these links by capturing friendship quality specifically in terms of caring behavior between friends, which involves peers validating other children’s skills, ideas, and worth (Parker & Asher, 1993). Better friendship quality may be particularly meaningful for low-income, ethnic minority children given that exposure to poverty-related stressors can strain the quality of relationships (Lengua et al , 2014). Second, self-regulation in middle childhood may explain the number of promotive factors that children experience. Participation in both after-school programs and volunteer activities has been positively linked to well-being (Mahoney, Parente, & Lord, 2007; Scales, Blyth, Berkas, & Kielsmeier, 2000). Participation in both after-school programs and volunteer activities has been positively linked to well-being (Mahoney, Parente, & Lord, 2007; Scales, Blyth, Berkas, & Kielsmeier, 2000). Previous research has documented links from greater EF and less impulsivity to fewer behavior problems (Diamond, 2013; Eisenberg et al , 2011; Han et al , 2016; Moran, Lengua, & Zalewski, 2013; Morris et al , 2013; Motamedi, Bierman, & Huang-Pollock, 2016; Rudolph, Troop-Gordon, & Llewellyn, 2013; Sasser, Bierman, & Heinrichs, 2015; Sulik et al , 2015). Previous research has documented links from greater EF and less impulsivity to fewer behavior problems (Diamond, 2013; Eisenberg et al , 2011; Han et al , 2016; Moran, Lengua, & Zalewski, 2013; Morris et al , 2013; Motamedi, Bierman, & Huang-Pollock, 2016; Rudolph, Troop-Gordon, & Llewellyn, 2013; Sasser, Bierman, & Heinrichs, 2015; Sulik et al , 2015). Previous research has documented links from greater EF and less impulsivity to fewer behavior problems (Diamond, 2013; Eisenberg et al , 2011; Han et al , 2016; Moran, Lengua, & Zalewski, 2013; Morris et al , 2013; Motamedi, Bierman, & Huang-Pollock, 2016; Rudolph, Troop-Gordon, & Llewellyn, 2013; Sasser, Bierman, & Heinrichs, 2015; Sulik et al , 2015). Self-Regulation in Middle Childhood as a Mediator Such an overall picture would help fill gaps in what is known regarding the roles of different aspects of self-regulation in broader social and emotional well-being during middle childhood (Jones et al , 2016; Morrison & Grammer, 2016; Nigg, 2017). The CSRP was a classroombased, multicomponent mental health intervention, which was administered within the context of a cluster randomized controlled trial (RCT) design (for details, see Raver et al , 2011). First, given the importance of early childhood, we examined the ways self-regulation during early childhood predicts self-regulation during middle childhood. First, given the importance of early childhood, we examined the ways self-regulation during early childhood predicts self-regulation during middle childhood. Children and their families and teachers participated in additional waves, and the current study includes data from 4 and 6 years after baseline. 