Therefore levels of phosphorylated β-catenin were measured during the different stages of hormonal progression by western blot analyses with an antibody against phospho-Y142 of β-catenin. Therefore levels of phosphorylated β-catenin were measured during the different stages of hormonal progression by western blot analyses with an antibody against phospho-Y142 of β-catenin. Therefore levels of phosphorylated β-catenin were measured during the different stages of hormonal progression by western blot analyses with an antibody against phospho-Y142 of β-catenin. Therefore levels of phosphorylated β-catenin were measured during the different stages of hormonal progression by western blot analyses with an antibody against phospho-Y142 of β-catenin. No phosphorylation of Y142 could be detected in samples from intact mice (Fig 4B). Consistent with increased levels of Y142 phospho-β-catenin in castrate resistant prostate cancer, expression of tyrosine kinase-associated YES1 and LYN that phosphorylate β-catenin (33) were increased with castrate resistance (Fig. Consistent with increased levels of Y142 phospho-β-catenin in castrate resistant prostate cancer, expression of tyrosine kinase-associated YES1 and LYN that phosphorylate β-catenin (33) were increased with castrate resistance (Fig. Consistent with increased levels of Y142 phospho-β-catenin in castrate resistant prostate cancer, expression of tyrosine kinase-associated YES1 and LYN that phosphorylate β-catenin (33) were increased with castrate resistance (Fig. The β-catenin downstream transcription factors, TCF3 and LEF, and expression of their target genes, MYC and CCND1, were significantly decreased, while expression of the transcription inhibitor, CTNNBIP1, was increased in castrate resistant prostate cancer. The β-catenin downstream transcription factors, TCF3 and LEF, and expression of their target genes, MYC and CCND1, were significantly decreased, while expression of the transcription inhibitor, CTNNBIP1, was increased in castrate resistant prostate cancer. Increased colocalization of AR and β-catenin in castrate resistant prostate cancerActivation of the Wnt pathway should induce the accumulation of β-catenin in cytoplasm which would be expected to facilitate the activity of downstream transcription factors. Increased colocalization of AR and β-catenin in castrate resistant prostate cancerActivation of the Wnt pathway should induce the accumulation of β-catenin in cytoplasm which would be expected to facilitate the activity of downstream transcription factors. To further explore for possible crosstalk between β-catenin and AR in castrate resistant prostate cancer, we investigated the colocalization of AR and β-catenin by fluorescent microscopy using xenografts harvested before and after castration. To do this, endogenous complexes of AR and β-catenin were co-immunoprecipitated from LNCaP xenografts at various stages of hormonal progression. To do this, endogenous complexes of AR and β-catenin were co-immunoprecipitated from LNCaP xenografts at various stages of hormonal progression. To do this, endogenous complexes of AR and β-catenin were co-immunoprecipitated from LNCaP xenografts at various stages of hormonal progression. To do this, endogenous complexes of AR and β-catenin were co-immunoprecipitated from LNCaP xenografts at various stages of hormonal progression. The immunoprecipitated complexes were probed by western blot analyses. The AR is suspected to play an important role in castrate resistant prostate cancer. β-catenin activity is regulated by phosphorylation followed by degradation. β-catenin activity is regulated by phosphorylation followed by degradation. These data provide the first evidence of similarity between the LNCaP hollow fiber model to the clinical scenario at the transcriptome level for hormonal progression. The re-expression of PSA suggests that the AR plays a role in castrate resistant disease. The re-expression of PSA suggests that the AR plays a role in castrate resistant disease. The re-expression of PSA suggests that the AR plays a role in castrate resistant disease. The re-expression of PSA suggests that the AR plays a role in castrate resistant disease. The re-expression of PSA suggests that the AR plays a role in castrate resistant disease. Affymetrix Genechip analysis identified changes in expression of 1,092 genes in response to androgen stimulation in LNCaP cells (26). Specific examples include the expression of androgen-regulated genes such as KLK3, KLK2, ELL2, SOCS2, and RHOU that were re-expressed in castrate resistant prostate cancer. Specific examples include the expression of androgen-regulated genes such as KLK3, KLK2, ELL2, SOCS2, and RHOU that were re-expressed in castrate resistant prostate cancer. Expression of genes that are known to be suppressed by androgen, such as MMP16 (26), were re-suppressed in castrate resistant prostate cancer (Fig 2). Expression of genes that are known to be suppressed by androgen, such as MMP16 (26), were re-suppressed in castrate resistant prostate cancer (Fig 2). Expression of genes that are known to be suppressed by androgen, such as MMP16 (26), were re-suppressed in castrate resistant prostate cancer (Fig 2). Expression of genes that are known to be suppressed by androgen, such as MMP16 (26), were re-suppressed in castrate resistant prostate cancer (Fig 2). Expression of genes that are known to be suppressed by androgen, such as MMP16 (26), were re-suppressed in castrate resistant prostate cancer (Fig 2). In present study, we provide the first in vivo evidence of the relevance of β-catenin pathway in the hormonal progression of CaP.β-catenin has been reported to be a relatively specific coactivator of the AR with only the vitamin D receptor of the steroid receptor family also showing some interaction (3). In present study, we provide the first in vivo evidence of the relevance of β-catenin pathway in the hormonal progression of CaP.β-catenin has been reported to be a relatively specific coactivator of the AR with only the vitamin D receptor of the steroid receptor family also showing some interaction (3). The importance of validating endogenous complexes using in vivo physiological or pathological conditions is based upon: 1) protein-protein interactions are dependent upon concentrations of the proteins as well as the levels of stimulation, and thus overexpression of a protein by transfection may lead to false-positives; 2) over-expression or forced expression of proteins may cause aberrant cellular localization and/or inappropriate timing of expression if the expression of proteins are “normally” dependent upon the cell cycle phase; 3) protein modifications required for interactions may vary in different cells or under different cellular conditions; 4) cell cultures cannot substitute the physiological milieu of in vivo conditions nor can cell cultures mimic accurately the hormonal progression that occurs in vivo in response to castration of the host; and 5) the three-dimensional architecture of the xenograft and potential effects on E-cadherin and other cell adhesion molecules may not be accurately represented using cells maintained in monolayer. Activity of Wnt/β-catenin pathway in castrate resistant prostate cancerThe Wnt pathway and its interaction with AR have been suspected to play important roles in prostate cancer (48–50). Increased levels of β-catenin combined with decreased Tcf3/Lef would provide more β-catenin protein to be recruited by AR. In the present study, we applied Affymetrix GeneChip (Human Genome U133 plus 2) combined with the LNCaP xenograft and Hollow Fiber models to identify global changes in gene expression changes associated with castrate resistant prostate cancer. These data suggest a role for β-catenin interaction with the AR in the progression of prostate cancer to the terminal castrate resistant stage. RNA samples from cells were analyzed by Affymetrix Genechip microarray. RNA samples from cells were analyzed by Affymetrix Genechip microarray. RNA samples from cells were analyzed by Affymetrix Genechip microarray. RNA samples from cells were analyzed by Affymetrix Genechip microarray. The syntheses of cDNA and biotinylated cRNA were performed according to the protocols provided by the manufacturer (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA). The Genechips were automatically washed and stained with streptavidin–phycoerythrin conjugate in an Affymetrix Genechip Fluidics Station. The Genechips were automatically washed and stained with streptavidin–phycoerythrin conjugate in an Affymetrix Genechip Fluidics Station. The immunofluorescence staining of proteins was detected using a Zeiss Axioplan-2 Fluorescence Microscope (Zeiss, Toronto, ON, Canada). There were 79 genes identified to be significantly differentially expressed between castrate resistant versus androgen-dependent clinical samples with the p-value lower than 0.001 (SI Table 2). Cluster 1 (represented by CTNNBIP, a regulator of β-catenin) included 814 genes whose expression increased in castrate resistant samples. Cluster 1 (represented by CTNNBIP, a regulator of β-catenin) included 814 genes whose expression increased in castrate resistant samples. To characterize the status of the AR pathway in castrate resistant prostate cancer, a hierarchical two-dimensional clustering algorithm that was based on similarity of expression patterns was applied to 1092 genes previously identified to be differentially expressed in response to androgen in LNCaP cells maintained in cell culture (26). Levels of β-catenin and AR are both increased in castrate resistant prostate cancer. Levels of β-catenin and AR are both increased in castrate resistant prostate cancer. Levels of β-catenin and AR are both increased in castrate resistant prostate cancer. Increased expression of AR and β-catenin in castrate resistant prostate cancerGenes differentially expressed in castrate resistant prostate cancer represented many biological categories; however, several of these genes have functional attributes that could contribute to castration-resistant growth. Increased expression of AR and β-catenin in castrate resistant prostate cancerGenes differentially expressed in castrate resistant prostate cancer represented many biological categories; however, several of these genes have functional attributes that could contribute to castration-resistant growth. Increased expression of AR and β-catenin in castrate resistant prostate cancerGenes differentially expressed in castrate resistant prostate cancer represented many biological categories; however, several of these genes have functional attributes that could contribute to castration-resistant growth. 