Irrespective of the diameter (i.e., even if less than 3 mm), increase in caliber upstream to a stricture or intraductal calculus must be considered dilated. Grading of features of CP with MRI is similar to CT for atrophy, ductal dilation, and ductal obstruction (strictures/intraductal obstructing calculi). Parenchymal calcifications cannot be assessed by MRI. Similar to contour irregularity, loss of ductal compliance on Secretin-MRCP also implies periductal fibrosis and should be included in this category [31]. Exocrine reserveBased on the extent of fluid accumulation in duodenum and proximal jejunum with Secretin-MRCP, this can be graded as normal, mildly diminished, moderately diminished, or severely diminished [47]. Scoring should be assigned to imaging surrogates of major histopathologic changes of CP and not to the spectrum of imaging findings of CP. Scoring should be assigned to imaging surrogates of major histopathologic changes of CP and not to the spectrum of imaging findings of CP. Scoring should be assigned to imaging surrogates of major histopathologic changes of CP and not to the spectrum of imaging findings of CP. The scoring system should ideally include parameters that can be easily assessed without special skills/software/equipment, etc. An additional scoring is obtained for exocrine reserve of pancreas assessed with Secretin, that can be labeled as S-0 (normal), S-1 (mildly diminished exocrine reserve), S-2 (moderately diminished exocrine reserve), and S-3 (severely diminished or no exocrine reserve). An additional scoring is obtained for exocrine reserve of pancreas assessed with Secretin, that can be labeled as S-0 (normal), S-1 (mildly diminished exocrine reserve), S-2 (moderately diminished exocrine reserve), and S-3 (severely diminished or no exocrine reserve). An additional scoring is obtained for exocrine reserve of pancreas assessed with Secretin, that can be labeled as S-0 (normal), S-1 (mildly diminished exocrine reserve), S-2 (moderately diminished exocrine reserve), and S-3 (severely diminished or no exocrine reserve). Positron Emission Tomography (PET) imaging and single-photon emission computerized tomography (SPECT) imaging with novel tracers such as 125 I-iodo-DPA-713 are some such examples [48, 49]. Thanks to tremendous advances in imaging techniques over the last few decades, several features of CP can now be assessed by cross-sectional imaging. A newer severity scoring system specifically designed to incorporate the capabilities of CT and MRI is the need of the hour. A newer severity scoring system specifically designed to incorporate the capabilities of CT and MRI is the need of the hour. A newer severity scoring system specifically designed to incorporate the capabilities of CT and MRI is the need of the hour. A newer severity scoring system specifically designed to incorporate the capabilities of CT and MRI is the need of the hour. A newer severity scoring system specifically designed to incorporate the capabilities of CT and MRI is the need of the hour. Interlobular and periductal fibrosis can lead to ductal distortion, strictures, and altered ductal flow resulting in propensity for intraductal protein plugs and calculi (Fig. Role of cross-sectional imaging modalities in assessment of CP CT scan and MRI have seen numerous technological breakthroughs in the last 2 decades which have resulted in faster scans, greater resolution, lesser radiation to the patient, and development of newer techniques and sequences [22, 23]. CT scan and MRI have seen numerous technological breakthroughs in the last 2 decades which have resulted in faster scans, greater resolution, lesser radiation to the patient, and development of newer techniques and sequences [22, 23]. CT scan and MRI have seen numerous technological breakthroughs in the last 2 decades which have resulted in faster scans, greater resolution, lesser radiation to the patient, and development of newer techniques and sequences [22, 23]. This can be best done by calculating the volume of pancreas or alternatively, using pancreatic thickness as a surrogate for volume (Fig. Calculating the volume is more accurate but may be impractical for adoption into daily use, particularly in a high-volume practice. When adapted from MRI research literature, CT scan can also potentially identify parenchymal fibrosis by demonstrating delayed peak enhancement of parenchyma in portal venous phase rather than in pancreatic parenchymal phase (Fig. 7) but also helps in identifying ductal compliance (ability of the duct to distend in response to intravenous administration of Secretin), which is a surrogate for periductal fibrosis [31]. A unique advantage of MR is the ability to non-invasively assess pancreatic exocrine reserve using Secretin-enhanced MRCP. This can either be graded based on presence and extension of fluid from proximal to distal duodenum and proximal jejunum or by more objective quantification by calculating the volume of secreted fluid [32]. This can either be graded based on presence and extension of fluid from proximal to distal duodenum and proximal jejunum or by more objective quantification by calculating the volume of secreted fluid [32]. This can either be graded based on presence and extension of fluid from proximal to distal duodenum and proximal jejunum or by more objective quantification by calculating the volume of secreted fluid [32]. Hence, it is not surprising that several classifications have been proposed for CP, and that most are not widely adopted or validated [3, 7-12]. Hence, it is not surprising that several classifications have been proposed for CP, and that most are not widely adopted or validated [3, 7-12]. Hence, assessment of pancreatic T1 signal was traditionally performed using an internal reference, such as liver, spleen, or muscle (Fig. Recent studies showed T1 relaxation time was significantly different between normal, mild CP, and moderate/severe CP [16, 18]. CalcificationsPancreatic calcification burden can be graded/scored by taking into account the number of punctate and macro calcifications. However, like atrophy, grading ducts dilation is also challenging given lack of widely accepted value for normal and in view of expected age-related changes [43]. 