The results of western blot analysis of cells treated with DSC4P-1, SA-3, or 8FC4P in the presence of cell-permeable pan-caspase inhibitor (Z-VAD-FMK)24 showed that whereas the levels of antiapoptotic proteins were reduced in treated cells, the levels of proapoptotic proteins were increased (Figure 5A).58–61 However, C4P did not alter the levels of proapoptotic and antiapoptotic proteins in cells. The finding provides further support for the suggestion that the cytochrome c release and procaspase-3 cleavage mediated by DSC4P-1, SA-3, and 8FC4P result from osmotic stress and subsequently generated ROS.To determine whether the synthetic transporters of the present study induce caspase activation, we determined the caspase activities of lysates of cells treated with DSC4P-1, SA-3, and 8FC4P, as well as C4P, by using a colorimetric peptide substrate for caspases, Ac-DEVD-pNA (p-nitroaniline [pNA]). This increase was blocked when Ac-DEVD-CHO, a known inhibitor of caspases, was added to the lysates of cells treated with DSC4P-1, SA-3, or 8FC4P. This increase was blocked when Ac-DEVD-CHO, a known inhibitor of caspases, was added to the lysates of cells treated with DSC4P-1, SA-3, or 8FC4P. This increase was blocked when Ac-DEVD-CHO, a known inhibitor of caspases, was added to the lysates of cells treated with DSC4P-1, SA-3, or 8FC4P. This increase was blocked when Ac-DEVD-CHO, a known inhibitor of caspases, was added to the lysates of cells treated with DSC4P-1, SA-3, or 8FC4P. This increase was blocked when Ac-DEVD-CHO, a known inhibitor of caspases, was added to the lysates of cells treated with DSC4P-1, SA-3, or 8FC4P. This then leads to the generation of ROS via the sequential activation of Rho proteins, PLC, PKC, and NOX, which then promotes caspase-dependent apoptosis (Figures 6A and 6B). As described above, the osmotic stress induced by the present synthetic transporters was found to stimulate PLC, an enzyme that cleaves PIP2 into DAG and IP3. Previous studies have led to an appreciation that the IP3 produced by PLC serves to activate IP3R, which is an intracellular Ca2+-release channel of the ER (Figure 6C).64,65 When IP3R is activated by IP3, Ca2+ ions are released from the ER into the cytosol. The increased cytosolic Ca2+ concentration stimulates the AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK).66 These events also activate beclin-1, which plays a central role in autophagy by enhancing the formation of phagophores.67,68 We thus tested whether the synthetic transporters of the present study would affect the cytosolic Ca2+ concentration and whether they would induce activation of AMPK and beclin-1.HeLa cells were individually incubated with DSC4P-1, SA-3, 8FC4P, and C4P in the absence and presence of inhibitors of PLC (D609, U73122) and IP3R (2-APB). The levels of phosphorylated AMPK and beclin-1 were likewise greatly reduced when 2-APB, D609, or U73122 was co-treated with SA-3 and 8FC4P (Figures 7B and S35). The levels of phosphorylated AMPK and beclin-1 were likewise greatly reduced when 2-APB, D609, or U73122 was co-treated with SA-3 and 8FC4P (Figures 7B and S35). The levels of phosphorylated AMPK and beclin-1 were likewise greatly reduced when 2-APB, D609, or U73122 was co-treated with SA-3 and 8FC4P (Figures 7B and S35). Collectively, these findings lead us to suggest that 8FC4P and SA-3 promote autophagy by activating AMPK and beclin-1 without inducing Ca2+-mediated apoptosis and that DSC4P-1 does not enhance Ca2+-mediated autophagy (Figure 6C). Accordingly, we examined whether the present synthetic transporters would affect lysosome function by initially measuring the lysosomal pH. Accordingly, we examined whether the present synthetic transporters would affect lysosome function by initially measuring the lysosomal pH. To determine whether treatment with the present synthetic ion transporters leads to decreases in the lysosomal Cl− concentration, we incubated cells with each transporter and then treated them with a lysosomal chloride-ion-selective fluorescent probe, MQAE-MP (Figure 7D).77 On the basis of the extent of fluorescence quenching of MQAE-MP, incubation with 8FC4P and SA-3 serves to decrease the lysosomal Cl− concentrations (Figures 7D and S38). To test this possibility, we determined the effect of the present synthetic ion transporters on the activity of the lysosomal enzymes cathepsins B and L by using cell-permeable cathepsin B and L probes, MR-(RR)2 and MR-(FR)2, respectively.24 Treatment of cells with 8FC4P and SA-3 led to a noticeable decrease in the activity levels of cathepsins B and L, as judged from the diminished red fluorescence derived from MR-(RR)2 and MR-(FR)2 (Figure 7E). However, DSC4P and C4P showed no effect on the activity of either cathepsin B or L. Taken together, these findings support the contention that 8FC4P and SA-3, but not DSC4P and C4P, disrupt lysosomal function by decreasing the lysosomal Cl− anion concentrations.Because lysosome function is critical for the autophagy process, transporters with an ability to disrupt lysosome function should block the autophagy process. Particularly noteworthy is the distinct correlation between the effects on autophagy and the model membrane studies. To our knowledge, this is the first mechanistic study of how synthetic ion transporters affect apoptosis and autophagy. To our knowledge, this is the first mechanistic study of how synthetic ion transporters affect apoptosis and autophagy. Here, the assumption is that gluconate is not transported because of its high hydrophilicity and bulkiness and that an added K+ ionophore, valinomycin, provides a counterion pathway for electrogenic K+ transport. As shown in Figure 1C, both DSC4P-1 and SA-3 proved active in the two assays. As shown in Figure 1C, both DSC4P-1 and SA-3 proved active in the two assays. Whereas DSC4P-1 and SA-3 proved slightly better at H+ or OH− flux than H+/Cl− co-transport, 8FC4P was found to be more effective at H+/Cl− co-transport than H+ or OH– flux. Only DSC4P-1 displayed a moderate selectivity for chloride in both the untreated and BSA-treated experiments.We next sought to confirm the mechanism of transport of DSC4P-1. Ionophore-induced Cl− efflux was measured by an ion-selective electrode (ISE) from KCl-loaded vesicles suspended in an inert external potassium gluconate solution, coupling with either valinomycin (an electrogenic K+ transporter) or monensin (an electroneutral M+/H+ transporter). On this basis, and as shown in Figure 1C, DSC4P-1 appeared to be more effective (by a factor of ~9; see Table 1) at mediating electrogenic Cl– transport than electroneutral H+/Cl− co-transport (or OH−/Cl− exchange).28 In contrast, SA-3 coupled much better to monensin than to valinomycin, supporting the notion that SA-3 acts as an electroneutral cotransporter rather than a chloride uniporter. Taken in concert, these model studies thus serve to underscore that DSC4P-1, SA-3, and 8FC4P all function as ionophores but with distinctively different mechanisms. In contrast, only the electroneutral HCl cotransporters (SA-3 and 8FC4P) can decrease lysosomal H+ and Cl− concentration, leading us to suggest that they may act to disrupt autophagy. Synthetic Ion Transporters Induce Apoptosis in Cancer CellsWe previously showed that synthetic transporters DSC4P-1 and SA-3 promoted cancer cell death by increasing intracellular ion concentrations.23,24 To allow for valid comparisons, we examined the effects of 8FC4P and C4P on cell viability by incubating several cancer cell lines (HeLa cells, A549 cells, PLC/PRF/5 [Alexander hepatoma] cells, HepG2 [human hepatoblastoma carcinoma] cells, Capan-1 [human pancreatic adenocarcinoma] cells, and HCT116 [human colorectal carcinoma] cells) with each substance. HeLa and A549 cells were individually incubated with DSC4P-1, SA-3, 8FC4P, and C4P in buffers containing both chloride and sodium ions (HEPES-buffered solutions) or in analogous buffers depleted in either chloride anion (Cl−-free solutions) or sodium cations (Na+-free solutions).24 MTT assays revealed that the cell-death activities of DSC4P-1, SA-3, and 8FC4P were greatly attenuated in both Cl−-free and Na+-free solutions (Figures 2C and S29). Synthetic Transporters Induce Osmotic Stress in CellsNext, we sought to elucidate the cellular mechanisms by determining how the synthetic transporters 8FC4P, DSC4P-1, and SA-3 promote apoptosis. Synthetic Transporters Induce Osmotic Stress in CellsNext, we sought to elucidate the cellular mechanisms by determining how the synthetic transporters 8FC4P, DSC4P-1, and SA-3 promote apoptosis. Synthetic Transporters Induce Osmotic Stress in CellsNext, we sought to elucidate the cellular mechanisms by determining how the synthetic transporters 8FC4P, DSC4P-1, and SA-3 promote apoptosis. Synthetic Transporters Induce Osmotic Stress in CellsNext, we sought to elucidate the cellular mechanisms by determining how the synthetic transporters 8FC4P, DSC4P-1, and SA-3 promote apoptosis. Synthetic Transporters Induce Osmotic Stress in CellsNext, we sought to elucidate the cellular mechanisms by determining how the synthetic transporters 8FC4P, DSC4P-1, and SA-3 promote apoptosis. On the basis of the above findings, namely that these substances increase intracellular ion concentrations, we assumed that their mode of action might involve osmotic stress-induced apoptotic cell death.33,34 It is known that a sudden alteration in the solute concentration around cells induces osmotic stress and, within a few minutes, causes a change in the cell volume that can persist up to 2.5–3 h.35,36 Under conditions of high extracellular solute concentrations (hyperosmotic conditions), water molecules exit from cells, leading to a decrease in the cell volume (cell shrinkage). These findings are consistent with the suggestion that transporter-induced ion influx into cells triggers osmotic stress.Multiple previous studies have shown that induction of osmotic stress in cells leads to activation of p38 (see Figure 6A).38,39 This typically occurs within a short time window and is ascribed to the stress-induced activation of the guanine nucleotide exchange factor, Brx, followed by the formation of its osmosensing complex with the c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase interacting protein 4 (JIP4).40,41 Thus, increased levels of phosphorylated p38 are taken as an indication of osmotic stress induction.42 On this basis, we tested whether the synthetic transporters of this study had the ability to activate p38. Osmotic Stress Induced by Synthetic Transporters Promotes ApoptosisNext, we investigated how the osmotic stress induced by DSC4P-1, SA-3, and 8FC4P promotes apoptosis. Osmotic Stress Induced by Synthetic Transporters Promotes ApoptosisNext, we investigated how the osmotic stress induced by DSC4P-1, SA-3, and 8FC4P promotes apoptosis. Osmotic Stress Induced by Synthetic Transporters Promotes ApoptosisNext, we investigated how the osmotic stress induced by DSC4P-1, SA-3, and 8FC4P promotes apoptosis. These findings are taken as further evidence that the osmotic stress in cells treated with the synthetic ion transporters of this study leads to an enhancement in PLC activation through stimulation of Rho proteins.DAG, produced by activated PLC, is known to stimulate protein kinase C (PKC) and generate phosphorylated PKC through direct binding of DAG to PKC.48–50 Therefore, we sought to determine whether treatment of cells with DSC4P-1, SA-3, and 8FC4P would lead to activation of PKC. In contrast, when cells were co-treated with each synthetic transporter and a PLC inhibitor (D609), the level of phospho-PKC was greatly reduced (Figure 4B). In contrast, when cells were co-treated with each synthetic transporter and a PLC inhibitor (D609), the level of phospho-PKC was greatly reduced (Figure 4B). In contrast, when cells were co-treated with each synthetic transporter and a PLC inhibitor (D609), the level of phospho-PKC was greatly reduced (Figure 4B). In contrast, when cells were co-treated with each synthetic transporter and a PLC inhibitor (D609), the level of phospho-PKC was greatly reduced (Figure 4B). In contrast, when cells were co-treated with each synthetic transporter and a PLC inhibitor (D609), the level of phospho-PKC was greatly reduced (Figure 4B). In contrast, when cells were co-treated with each synthetic transporter and a PLC inhibitor (D609), the level of phospho-PKC was greatly reduced (Figure 4B). These findings are consistent with the notion that DSC4P-1, SA-3, and 8FC4P serve to activate PKC by stimulating PLC.Multiple previous studies have shown that activated PKC stimulates NADPH oxidase (NOX).51,52 NOX is responsible for the generation of ROS, which are known to induce apoptotic cell death.51 Therefore, we examined the ability of the synthetic ion transporters DSC4P-1, SA-3, and 8FC4P to generate NOX-mediated ROS. 