Mutating two or all three of the GAF sites (Fig. Mutating two or all three of the GAF sites (Fig. Mutating two or all three of the GAF sites (Fig. Mutating two or all three of the GAF sites (Fig. 2E,F), whereas the other lines showed less complete, albeit still clear, derepression (Fig. It is not possible to carry out this analysis in phol81A; pho1 double mutants, because they fail to pupariate (Brown et al , 2003). It is not possible to carry out this analysis in phol81A; pho1 double mutants, because they fail to pupariate (Brown et al , 2003). PRE300 also contains a reasonable match to the Grh consensus site (Fig. PRE300 also contains a reasonable match to the Grh consensus site (Fig. As the Pho site is necessary for the activity, this site was included in both parts (Fig. As the Pho site is necessary for the activity, this site was included in both parts (Fig. Is the eve PSE a PRE?Although PSS activity is often seen with transgenes carrying a PRE, not all PSEs can act as a PRE (Kassis, 2002). Is the eve PSE a PRE?Although PSS activity is often seen with transgenes carrying a PRE, not all PSEs can act as a PRE (Kassis, 2002). Is the eve PSE a PRE?Although PSS activity is often seen with transgenes carrying a PRE, not all PSEs can act as a PRE (Kassis, 2002). This reporter is expressed throughout the ectoderm and nervous system in late-stage embryos (Muller and Bienz, 1991). We initially tested PRE300-bxd-Ubx-Z inserted at four different chromosomal target sites, two of which were used in a previous study (Bateman et al , 2006) and two others that we developed. In addition to a strong effect in ph hemizygotes (Fig. However, when the 3' end point was extended to +9.2 kb (to generate the ‘RR’ construct) (Fujioka et al , 2003), expression was fully maintained (Fig. However, when the 3' end point was extended to +9.2 kb (to generate the ‘RR’ construct) (Fujioka et al , 2003), expression was fully maintained (Fig. Although Pho, as a PcG gene, is known only to be involved in maintaining the repressed state, its ortholog in mammals, YYI, is known to be involved in activation of some target genes (Gordon et al , 2006). We tested whether Pho affects positive maintenance activity. We tested whether Pho affects positive maintenance activity. 3) was introduced into the RR construct, CNS maintenance activity was reduced or eliminated. Moreover, mutations in GAF sites affect the PSS activity of PRE300 (Fig. Moreover, mutations in GAF sites affect the PSS activity of PRE300 (Fig. Moreover, mutations in GAF sites affect the PSS activity of PRE300 (Fig. In order to test this, the GFP-RR transgene was placed in a phol81A, pho1 double mutant background. More generally, although PREs usually exhibit PSS activity, PSEs may not be sufficient to function as a PRE (Kassis, 1994; Kassis, 2002). In phol81A single mutants, there was no apparent effect (not shown). Pho binds to the eve PRE in vivoThe convergence of genetic and biochemical evidence presented above strongly suggests that Pho acts directly through the binding site in PRE300. To confirm that Pho interacts with this region, and with this site, in vivo, we performed ChIP assays. 5 (B and E, primer set 13), Pho was detected specifically in the region of PRE300, both in early and later-stage embryos. 5B,E, primer set 8). In this study, we dissected a strong pairing sensitive silencing element from the 3' boundary of the eve locus. In this study, we dissected a strong pairing sensitive silencing element from the 3' boundary of the eve locus. In this study, we dissected a strong pairing sensitive silencing element from the 3' boundary of the eve locus. Previous studies have suggested that PRE-containing P-element-based transgenes have a tendency to insert near endogenous PREs, and that this can bias reporter gene expression. Previous studies have suggested that PRE-containing P-element-based transgenes have a tendency to insert near endogenous PREs, and that this can bias reporter gene expression. However, recent studies have blurred the distinction between PcG genes and trxG genes, as some members of each class appear to have dual functions (Grimaud et al , 2006). A similar situation may pertain to Pho function in the eve locus. A similar situation may pertain to Pho function in the eve locus. However, our observation that a consensus Grh binding site is present in the more active half of PRE300 suggests the involvement of Grh. However, our observation that a consensus Grh binding site is present in the more active half of PRE300 suggests the involvement of Grh. However, our observation that a consensus Grh binding site is present in the more active half of PRE300 suggests the involvement of Grh. Consistent with the broad overexpression of eve seen in the CNS of ph mutants (Smouse et al , 1988), the eve PRE may silence expression in many cells by forming a silencing complex. There are accumulating data suggesting that locus-wide regulation occurs through direct interactions of the promoter with enhancers and locus control regions. Both contain clusters of binding sites typical of a PRE/TRE. It has been suggested that PRE-containing transgenes have a tendency to insert near endogenous PREs (Chiang et al , 1995; Fauvarque et al , 1995), which might be expected if they mediate long-range interactions. It has been suggested that PRE-containing transgenes have a tendency to insert near endogenous PREs (Chiang et al , 1995; Fauvarque et al , 1995), which might be expected if they mediate long-range interactions. This may serve to keep eve on in some cells and to keep it off in others, depending on whether activating or repressive complexes mediate the association. 1, eve DNA from +8.9 to +9.2 kb (PRE300) was cloned upstream of the Glass-binding sites followed by mini-white. RMCE was performed as previously described (Bateman et al , 2006). The attP target lines used were chosen at chromosomal locations that were not suggested to have PREs nearby (Negre et al , 2006; Schwartz et al , 2006; Sinclair et al , 1998; Tolhuis et al , 2006). Homozygous phol larvae were tentatively identified as non-Tubby, and confirmed post hoc by PCR. Homozygous mutant larvae from these lines were identified by their non-Tb phenotype. For trx1, eggs were collected similarly, then moved to 25°C until the third larval instar. Dechorionated embryos were crosslinked with 2% formaldehyde for 15 minutes at room temperature, washed and stored at −80°C. The pellets were subjected to ChIP analysis essentially as described previously (Wang et al , 2004b), using Pho-specific antiserum (Brown et al , 1998). As expected, with the Glass-binding sites, the range of eye colors of heterozygous transgenic flies shifted toward the dark end of the spectrum (Fig. As expected, with the Glass-binding sites, the range of eye colors of heterozygous transgenic flies shifted toward the dark end of the spectrum (Fig. As expected, with the Glass-binding sites, the range of eye colors of heterozygous transgenic flies shifted toward the dark end of the spectrum (Fig. 1, compare ‘with Glass’ with ‘without Glass’; note that none of these lines carry a PSE). Among 53 independent lines carrying the Glass vector without the PSE, 43 were homozygous viable and none showed PSS (Fig. 1, ‘with Glass’).We dissected the original 600 bp PSE (+8.6 to +9.2 kb, data not shown) down to an active region of 300 bp (+8.9 to +9.2 kb). The resulting element caused repression of Glass-augmented mini-white expression in heterozygous transgenic flies, as evidenced by the resulting shift toward lighter eye colors (‘PRE300’ in Fig. The resulting element caused repression of Glass-augmented mini-white expression in heterozygous transgenic flies, as evidenced by the resulting shift toward lighter eye colors (‘PRE300’ in Fig. The resulting element caused repression of Glass-augmented mini-white expression in heterozygous transgenic flies, as evidenced by the resulting shift toward lighter eye colors (‘PRE300’ in Fig. The resulting element caused repression of Glass-augmented mini-white expression in heterozygous transgenic flies, as evidenced by the resulting shift toward lighter eye colors (‘PRE300’ in Fig. The resulting element caused repression of Glass-augmented mini-white expression in heterozygous transgenic flies, as evidenced by the resulting shift toward lighter eye colors (‘PRE300’ in Fig. Among homozygous viable lines, 73% of them showed PSS activity (Fig. Although the combination of PRE300 with the eve promoter caused more repression of heterozygous mini-white expression than did either one alone, PSS activity itself was not increased relative to that of PRE300 (PRE300 + PSEpro, Fig. Previous dissections of PSS regions from the en gene (Americo et al , 2002), the MCP silencer (Busturia et al , 2001) and the iab-7 PRE (Hagstrom et al, 1997; Mishra et al , 2001) (both from the bithorax complex) showed that activity depended on both Pho- and GAF-binding sites. Previous dissections of PSS regions from the en gene (Americo et al , 2002), the MCP silencer (Busturia et al , 2001) and the iab-7 PRE (Hagstrom et al, 1997; Mishra et al , 2001) (both from the bithorax complex) showed that activity depended on both Pho- and GAF-binding sites. Mutating the single Pho site (Fig. Mutating the single Pho site (Fig. Mutating the single Pho site (Fig. Mutating the single Pho site (Fig. Mutating the single Pho site (Fig. 