Hippocampus volume and entorhinal cortex volume are corrected to the whole cerebral volume. 4B, p > 0.05) or entorhinal cortex volume (Fig. 5A, p > 0.05), logical memory test II (Fig. Moreover, biomarkers derived from blood are more accessible and have advantages over CSF or brain imaging biomarkers. Taken together, findings from the current pilot study provide insights into future investigations on whether plasma AMPKα1 might be a feasible biomarker for the early diagnosis of AD. Unfortunately, no CSF AMPKα1/α2 could be detected with the currently available ELISA kit. In fact, when MCI and AD patients are combined, the significance of difference between patients and controls becomes even more distinct. Notably, carriers of APOE ε4, a well-known genetic risk factor for non-familial AD [3], are much lower in MCI group (5.6%) compared to control (22.2%) and AD (40%) groups. Finally, the sensitivity and specificity of AMPKα1 as a biomarker is not so high, which could also be due to the sample size. Alzheimer’s disease (AD) is the most common dementia syndrome, and one of the leading causes of disability and casualty in elderly [1, 2]. The specific targets and exact roles of the two AMPKα isoforms in the central nervous system have not been determined yet [14, 28-30]. Neuropsychological assessment batteries, including Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), Logical Memory test II and Category Fluency test, were conducted by trained nurses. MRI scanning was carried out to measure the thicknesses of related corti and volumes of hippocampus and entorhino cortex using the program FreeSurfer [32]. All the subjects and/or their guardians were fully informed of the study and signed the consent form. All the subjects and/or their guardians were fully informed of the study and signed the consent form. All the subjects and/or their guardians were fully informed of the study and signed the consent form. Levels of AMPKα1 and AMPKα2 in plasma were determined by ELISA kits following the manufacture’s instruction (AMPKα1 ELISA kits were purchased from abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA (ab181422), AMPKα2 ELISA kits were purchased from LSBio, Seattle, WA, USA (LS-F10706)). Levels of AMPKα1 and AMPKα2 in plasma were determined by ELISA kits following the manufacture’s instruction (AMPKα1 ELISA kits were purchased from abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA (ab181422), AMPKα2 ELISA kits were purchased from LSBio, Seattle, WA, USA (LS-F10706)). 50 μl or 100 μl of diluted plasma was added to the wells and incubated with antibody cocktails at 37°C for 1 or 2h based on the protocols. 50 μl or 100 μl of diluted plasma was added to the wells and incubated with antibody cocktails at 37°C for 1 or 2h based on the protocols. 50 μl or 100 μl of diluted plasma was added to the wells and incubated with antibody cocktails at 37°C for 1 or 2h based on the protocols. 50 μl or 100 μl of diluted plasma was added to the wells and incubated with antibody cocktails at 37°C for 1 or 2h based on the protocols. 50 μl or 100 μl of diluted plasma was added to the wells and incubated with antibody cocktails at 37°C for 1 or 2h based on the protocols. Ethics statementThis study was approved by the Institutional Review Board (IRB) at the Wake Forest University Health Sciences. Due to loss of follow-up, data of neuropsychological test, CSF biomarker and MRI scanning were incomplete. Those without the follow-up data were excluded from linear regression analysis. All the statistical analyses were conducted using GraphPad 5.0. p < 0.05 was considered significant. Demographic and clinical characteristics of subjectsDemographic and clinical characteristics of those subjects are shown in Table 1. In Category Fluency test, subjects are asked to produce as many words as possible from a category in 1 min [34]. Scores of MMSE and Category Fluency test are significantly lower in AD patients as compared to control groups. Performance of both MCI and AD patients in Logical Memory test II is significantly worse compared to control group. p-tau and t-tau levels in CSF are significantly increased in AD patients, compared to control and MCI. No difference is found between groups in hippocampus and entorhinal cortex volume that has been corrected to the whole cerebral volume. No difference is found between groups in hippocampus and entorhinal cortex volume that has been corrected to the whole cerebral volume. No difference is found between groups in hippocampus and entorhinal cortex volume that has been corrected to the whole cerebral volume. ROC analysis can give corresponding sensitivity and specificity at a specific point and can determine the best cut-off point for a biomarker. Here we explored the correlation between levels of AMPKα1 and these CSF biomarkers by performing linear regression analysis. 