Furthermore, for all FTs the growth of the blue and red forms and the decrease of the blue forms were slower than those for the purified FTs. The kC values for the HeLa cells suggest that the mRNA amount should be 10% after 8 h and 3% after 12 h incubation with doxycycline. A similar time course for the activity of the luciferase has been observed after inhibition of its transcription with tetracycline20. A similar time course for the activity of the luciferase has been observed after inhibition of its transcription with tetracycline20. A similar time course for the activity of the luciferase has been observed after inhibition of its transcription with tetracycline20. A similar time course for the activity of the luciferase has been observed after inhibition of its transcription with tetracycline20. Within 8 h, luciferase activity dropped to about 10% and was less than 2% of its original value after 12 h20. Previous studies on LAMPs trafficking using biochemical and immunofluorescence approaches had suggestedthat LAMPs canreach thelysosomevia twointracellular routes: a direct pathway from the Golgi to the late endosomes and lysosomes22,23, and an indirect pathway from the Golgi to the plasma membrane following the secretory pathway, and then to lysosomes via endocytosis24-26. Although it was initially considered that the pool of LAMPs at the plasma membrane was only evident under certain conditions (such as platelet activation or certain tumors), later studies knocking down adaptor trafficking proteins demonstrated that a portion of cellular LAMPs can be detected at the plasma membrane even under normal physiological conditions (reviewed in ref. In fact, analysis of chimera proteins of the luminal region of LAMP-1 and the three different cytosolic tails of LAMP-2 revealed that the variants reaching the plasma membrane were mainly LAMP-2A and LAMP-2B (ref. Although the combined use of surface biotinylation and cellular permeabilization helped to demonstrate that some membrane LAMPs are internalized, it was not possible to determine which fraction of the total LAMPs transits through the plasma membrane in a dynamic manner. LAMP-2A is encoded by a spliced variant of the lamp2 gene and acts as a lysosomal receptor for chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA)8,9. LAMP-2A is encoded by a spliced variant of the lamp2 gene and acts as a lysosomal receptor for chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA)8,9. Several types of mammalian cells exhibiting different levels of CMA activity were transiently transfected with this construct (see Supplementary Fig. LAMP-2A is sorted to endosomes and lysosomes through a tyrosine-based signal in its cytosolic C terminus, but a fraction of the protein is also observed at the plasma membrane10. The amount of the blue form then gradually decreased until its complete disappearance at 63 h, whereas the late red form of the LAMP-2A-medium-FT increased, reaching its maximum between 36.5 and 63 h (Fig. At 12 and 21 h the co-localization became partial, and only a very small fraction of the LAMP-2A-medium-FT merged with transferrin-Alexa 488 at later times. The regions where blue or red fluorescence was merged with Lysotracker Green were referred to the late endosomes and lysosomes. The regions where blue or red fluorescence was merged with Lysotracker Green were referred to the late endosomes and lysosomes. The regions where blue or red fluorescence was merged with Lysotracker Green were referred to the late endosomes and lysosomes. The regions where blue or red fluorescence was merged with Lysotracker Green were referred to the late endosomes and lysosomes. We determined that the red-to-blue ratio for medium-FT had small changes in the pH range of 5.4-7.4 (Fig. 12 h after expression, most of the protein resides in the late endosomes and lysosomes. 12 h after expression, most of the protein resides in the late endosomes and lysosomes. 12 h after expression, most of the protein resides in the late endosomes and lysosomes. The fast-FT has five amino acid mutations as compared to the original mCherry. Development of monomeric FTsThe gene encoding mCherry was used as a template for the multiple saturated mutagenesis at positions 42, 44, 65, 69, 106, 148, 203 and 224 (amino acid numbering follows that of Aequorea victoria GFP; see Fig. Lysine or arginine amino acids are almost always found at this position in RFPs14. Therefore Arg69 and Trp84 appear to be the key amino acids responsible for the timing behavior of the mCherry-based blue-to-red FTs. Based on the red-to-blue ratios observed for LAMP-2A-medium-FT in different compartments at various imaging time points, one may suggest the following major intracellular traffic pattern for the protein: Golgi → plasma membrane → early and recycling endosomes → late endosomes and lysosomes. Based on the red-to-blue ratios observed for LAMP-2A-medium-FT in different compartments at various imaging time points, one may suggest the following major intracellular traffic pattern for the protein: Golgi → plasma membrane → early and recycling endosomes → late endosomes and lysosomes. Our data support the predominant indirect targeting of LAMP-2A to lysosomes11. Our data support the predominant indirect targeting of LAMP-2A to lysosomes11. On the other hand, the difference between the ages of LAMP-2A proteins in the Golgi and those at the plasma membrane is small, which suggests that LAMP-2A is present there for a rather limited time. This conclusion is based on the following: if LAMP-2A travels from the Golgi to early endosomes and then recycles between endosomes and the plasma membrane, we should see two populations of endosomes with the different ages of LAMP-2A-FT. The microscopy data clearly indicate that for the majority of early and recycling endosomes, the red-to-blue ratio is larger than that on the plasma membrane. The microscopy data clearly indicate that for the majority of early and recycling endosomes, the red-to-blue ratio is larger than that on the plasma membrane. The microscopy data clearly indicate that for the majority of early and recycling endosomes, the red-to-blue ratio is larger than that on the plasma membrane. The microscopy data clearly indicate that for the majority of early and recycling endosomes, the red-to-blue ratio is larger than that on the plasma membrane. Consequently, a quite small fraction of LAMP-2A is involved in the recycling between the plasma membrane and endosomes. MutagenesisThe gene encoding mCherry was PCR amplified as a BglII-EcoRI fragment and inserted into a pBAD/His-B vector (Invitrogen). MutagenesisThe gene encoding mCherry was PCR amplified as a BglII-EcoRI fragment and inserted into a pBAD/His-B vector (Invitrogen). MutagenesisThe gene encoding mCherry was PCR amplified as a BglII-EcoRI fragment and inserted into a pBAD/His-B vector (Invitrogen). Protein characterizationMaturation of the blue and red forms was studied at 16, 25, 37 and 45 °C in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Protein characterizationMaturation of the blue and red forms was studied at 16, 25, 37 and 45 °C in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). Protein characterizationMaturation of the blue and red forms was studied at 16, 25, 37 and 45 °C in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS). To determine extinction coefficients, we relied on measuring the mature chromophore concentrations35, taking into account that the extinction coefficient of the model compound of the tyrosine-containing GFP-like chromophores is 44,000 M-1 cm-1 at 447 nm in 1 M NaOH35 and about 28,500 M-1 cm-1 at 382 nm in 1 M HCl36. Kinetic model for FT maturationTo quantitatively describe the chromophore conversion pathway in the FTs, we considered two kinetic models, (1) and (3). Kinetic model for FT maturationTo quantitatively describe the chromophore conversion pathway in the FTs, we considered two kinetic models, (1) and (3). Kinetic model for FT maturationTo quantitatively describe the chromophore conversion pathway in the FTs, we considered two kinetic models, (1) and (3). These models were based on the proposed earlier mechanism for the chromophore formation in tetrameric DsRed protein6. For fitting, the kinetic constants kB, kI and kR were kept the same as for the purified proteins. Microscopy imagingImaging of HeLa, Cos-1, NIH3T3 and HeLa Tet-Off cells was performed 13-122 h after transfection. Microscopy imagingImaging of HeLa, Cos-1, NIH3T3 and HeLa Tet-Off cells was performed 13-122 h after transfection. Cells were imaged using an Olympus IX81 inverted microscope equipped with a ×100 oil immersion objective lens, with custom blue (390/40 nm exciter, 460/40 nm emitter) and red (570/30 nm exciter, 615/40 nm emitter) filter sets (Chroma), that was operated with SlideBook 4.1 software (Intelligent Imaging Innovations). Cells were imaged using an Olympus IX81 inverted microscope equipped with a ×100 oil immersion objective lens, with custom blue (390/40 nm exciter, 460/40 nm emitter) and red (570/30 nm exciter, 615/40 nm emitter) filter sets (Chroma), that was operated with SlideBook 4.1 software (Intelligent Imaging Innovations). The maturation rates of the red forms were slowed as compared to that of mCherry. The maturation rates of the red forms were slowed as compared to that of mCherry. Consequently, the mCherry K69R mutant was used as a template for random mutagenesis aimed to screen for medium-FT and slow-FT phenotypes. For example, in the fast-FT phenotype, the mutation S112T increased the brightness of both red and blue forms to about the same extent. For example, in the fast-FT phenotype, the mutation S112T increased the brightness of both red and blue forms to about the same extent. The blue forms of the purified fast-FT, medium-FT and slow-FT had excitation/emission peaks of 403/466, 401/464 and 402/465 nm, respectively (Table 1 and Fig. 2 online).Molar extinction coefficients and quantum yields of the blue forms of the FTs were in the range of 33,400-49,700 M-1cm-1 and 0.30-0.41, respectively (Table 1). 2 online).Molar extinction coefficients and quantum yields of the blue forms of the FTs were in the range of 33,400-49,700 M-1cm-1 and 0.30-0.41, respectively (Table 1). Because the fluorescence of both blue and red forms decreased with acidification, the ratio between these fluorescence intensities changed with pH notably less than the red signal but more than the blue signal (Fig. For all FTs, the ratio changed less than 8% within the pH range of 5.4-7.4.During the FT maturation, the fluorescence of the blue forms increased to its maximum value, and after that decreased to zero (Fig. The most suitable templates for this appear to be the monomeric variants of DsRed7. This model was based on the proposed earlier mechanism for chromophore formation in tetrameric DsRed protein6. A spectrally undetectable C-form, which represents a cyclized chromophore-forming tripeptide in the reduced (and therefore colorless) state, is converted into a blue form (B-form), which then turns into a red form (R-form) (Scheme 1). A spectrally undetectable C-form, which represents a cyclized chromophore-forming tripeptide in the reduced (and therefore colorless) state, is converted into a blue form (B-form), which then turns into a red form (R-form) (Scheme 1). For the FTs, model (1) consisted of the following kinetic steps:(1)C→kBB→k1I→kRRwhere C and I are the nonfluorescent chromophore forms, B and R are the blue and red forms of FTs, and kB, kI and kR are the kinetic rate constants6 (Scheme 1). The mature deprotonated (anionic) R-form contains an additional double bond between the α carbon and amide nitrogen of Met65. Several hours after the transfection, transcription was stopped by addition of a doxycycline, and later the cells were analyzed by flow cytometry at different times (see Fig. 