Restart ImageJ after installing the plugin.NOTE: This plugin aligns images based on the “least squares congealing” principle15.Draw an ROI on the corrected full image set which spans several axons and does not extend beyond the proximal and distal boundaries of the activated fluorescence within each of the axons. This may be accomplished while viewing a frame which must be shifted by clicking Image | Transform | Translate. Draw an ROI using the Angle tool on the first frame of the aligned full image set with the first arm along one edge of the activated region, perpendicular to the axons, and the second arm vertical. Draw an ROI using the Angle tool on the first frame of the aligned full image set with the first arm along one edge of the activated region, perpendicular to the axons, and the second arm vertical. Press the ‘m’ key to measure the angle, which describes the orientation of the axons in the field of view.Set the scale of the images so that dimensions are measured in microns by clicking Analyze | Set Scale and entering the appropriate values.Open the ROI manager by clicking Analyze | Tools | ROI Manager. Press the ‘m’ key to measure the angle, which describes the orientation of the axons in the field of view.Set the scale of the images so that dimensions are measured in microns by clicking Analyze | Set Scale and entering the appropriate values.Open the ROI manager by clicking Analyze | Tools | ROI Manager. Add all three regions to the ROI manager. 9.Photobleach correctionIn the data spreadsheet for glycolytically inhibited axons, subtract the mean fluorescence of frame 1 (the pre-activation frame) from the mean fluorescence of each frame starting at frame 3 (the first timelapse frame) for a given ROI. Fit an exponential trendline to the data from each ROI (most spreadsheet programs have this function) with an equation in the form of Ae−bx. For the most accurate estimate of the photobleaching rate, use at least 15 axons in total from at least 5 separate nerves. For the most accurate estimate of the photobleaching rate, use at least 15 axons in total from at least 5 separate nerves. For the most accurate estimate of the photobleaching rate, use at least 15 axons in total from at least 5 separate nerves. For the most accurate estimate of the photobleaching rate, use at least 15 axons in total from at least 5 separate nerves. For the most accurate estimate of the photobleaching rate, use at least 15 axons in total from at least 5 separate nerves. This mouse permits the analysis of neurofilament transport in situ using fluorescence microscopy. In a pulse-spread experiment the flux can be determined from the rate of departure of the fluorescent neurofilaments from the activated region, which we refer to as the central window. In a pulse-spread experiment the flux can be determined from the rate of departure of the fluorescent neurofilaments from the activated region, which we refer to as the central window. In a pulse-spread experiment the flux can be determined from the rate of departure of the fluorescent neurofilaments from the activated region, which we refer to as the central window. The total loss of fluorescent neurofilament polymer from this central window per second (dQcdt) is the sum of the losses due to fluorescent neurofilament polymers leaving in anterograde and retrograde directions, i.e. The first of these approaches is the pulse-escape method described above. At early times, the flanking windows capture all the neurofilaments that exit the central window because these filaments do not have sufficient time to pass through the flanking windows and exit them on the other side. Normalized to the initial content of fluorescent neurofilament polymer in the central window, the rates of increase in the flanking windows become The values of νa and νr can be determined by measuring the movement of individual neurofilaments in cultured neurons, as reported previously17. As an example, we have used the first 5 minutes of data to measure the slopes for the pulse-spread data in Figure 3F. However, we cannot exclude the possibility that this discrepancy between the central and flanking slopes could also be due, at least in part, to underestimation of the extent of photobleaching (see Discussion), which would have the effect of underestimating the positive slopes in the flanking windows and overestimating the negative slope in the central window. From the rates in the flanking windows (%F0/min) and Eq. 1 above, we calculate the average net population velocity ν = 40*(0.00173–0.00108) = 0.026 μm/min, or 0.037 mm/day. For the reasons mentioned above, we believe that the estimate of 0.037 mm/day is an underestimate of the true velocity. To demonstrate the capability of the pulse-spread method to detect significant differences between populations, we compared the proximal and distal flanking window slopes measured from nerves perfused with both normal and inhibitor salines. To demonstrate the capability of the pulse-spread method to detect significant differences between populations, we compared the proximal and distal flanking window slopes measured from nerves perfused with both normal and inhibitor salines. We will discuss later the selection of sample sizes for experiments, however here we used one nerve in normal saline and two in inhibitory saline, due to the limitation of one acquisition field per nerve during inhibition. The extent of non-uniformity is wavelength-dependent and thus, should always be performed at the wavelength that is to be used for acquiring the experimental data. The extent of non-uniformity is wavelength-dependent and thus, should always be performed at the wavelength that is to be used for acquiring the experimental data. The extent of non-uniformity is wavelength-dependent and thus, should always be performed at the wavelength that is to be used for acquiring the experimental data. All methods described here have been approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of The Ohio State University. All methods described here have been approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of The Ohio State University. Additional attention must be paid to the alignment of the image stacks. Thus, it is imperative that image sets are aligned properly and inspected carefully before proceeding with the analysis. Since it is not practical to perform a separate bleaching calibration in each imaging session, a single calibration must be applied to multiple sessions spread over many weeks. An advantage of this approach is that it corrects for the bleaching characteristics within that same field, but a disadvantage is that the duration of the time window must be determined empirically and will depend on the rate of the transport as well as the length of the activated region. An advantage of this approach is that it corrects for the bleaching characteristics within that same field, but a disadvantage is that the duration of the time window must be determined empirically and will depend on the rate of the transport as well as the length of the activated region. An advantage of this approach is that it corrects for the bleaching characteristics within that same field, but a disadvantage is that the duration of the time window must be determined empirically and will depend on the rate of the transport as well as the length of the activated region. An advantage of this approach is that it corrects for the bleaching characteristics within that same field, but a disadvantage is that the duration of the time window must be determined empirically and will depend on the rate of the transport as well as the length of the activated region. While it is not possible to accurately determine population means, deviations and effect sizes before experimentation, we recommend using the Cohen method21 assuming a medium effect size and an alpha of 0.05. 2.Initial assembly of nerve perfusion chamberConnect the syringe and the tubing as shown in Figure 1A, placing the outflow tube into a waste flask.Place the outer gasket into the perfusion chamber housing, ensuring that the flow inlet and outlet posts are aligned with the holes in the gasket.Lay the inner gasket (silicone, 100 µm thick) on a #1.5 circular coverslip (40 mm diameter), carefully smoothing out any wrinkles in the gasket to ensure a tight seal. We use a transgenic mouse for this purpose, but it should also be possible to express the photoactivatable protein using methods such as viral transduction or in utero electroporation. 3.Dissection and preparation of mouse tibial nerveSacrifice the animal by carbon dioxide inhalation or another institutionally approved method. 3.Dissection and preparation of mouse tibial nerveSacrifice the animal by carbon dioxide inhalation or another institutionally approved method. Starting from this cut, slowly reflect the skin from the legs by gently pulling it away from the muscle and cutting the fascia.Place the animal in a supine position on a dissection tray and pin all four paws. Starting from this cut, slowly reflect the skin from the legs by gently pulling it away from the muscle and cutting the fascia.Place the animal in a supine position on a dissection tray and pin all four paws. Taking care not to put tension on the nerve, lift it away from the muscle, cutting any attachments.Cut the spine-distal end of the tibial nerve and transfer to a small Petri dish of room temperature oxygenated saline. Taking care not to put tension on the nerve, lift it away from the muscle, cutting any attachments.Cut the spine-distal end of the tibial nerve and transfer to a small Petri dish of room temperature oxygenated saline. Taking care not to put tension on the nerve, lift it away from the muscle, cutting any attachments.Cut the spine-distal end of the tibial nerve and transfer to a small Petri dish of room temperature oxygenated saline. Taking care not to put tension on the nerve, lift it away from the muscle, cutting any attachments.Cut the spine-distal end of the tibial nerve and transfer to a small Petri dish of room temperature oxygenated saline. From this point on in the procedure, always be certain to keep track of the proximal and distal ends of the nerve. From this point on in the procedure, always be certain to keep track of the proximal and distal ends of the nerve. From this point on in the procedure, always be certain to keep track of the proximal and distal ends of the nerve. Moreover, radioisotopic pulse-labeling is an indirect approach that requires the injection and sacrifice of multiple animals to generate a single time course. Flip the coverslip and microaqueduct assembly over, and place it within the perfusion chamber housing with the microaqueduct slide apposed to the outer gasket. Flip the coverslip and microaqueduct assembly over, and place it within the perfusion chamber housing with the microaqueduct slide apposed to the outer gasket. Flip the coverslip and microaqueduct assembly over, and place it within the perfusion chamber housing with the microaqueduct slide apposed to the outer gasket. Overtightening may crack the microaqueduct slide or coverslip. Flip the chamber over so that the coverslip is facing down.Slowly depress the saline syringe plunger to fill the perfusion chamber. This avoids siphoning, which can introduce bubbles or cause focus instability due to negative pressure in the chamber.Transfer the perfusion assembly to an inverted microscope stage and mount the saline syringe into the syringe pump. Then connect and turn on the in-line solution heater set to 37 °C.Connect the objective heater and set to 37 °C, apply oil to the objective, and insert the perfusion chamber into the stage mount.Apply oil to the chamber heater pad and attach to the perfusion chamber. Unmyelinated axons are more slender (typically <1 µm diameter) and are generally present in bundles (Remak bundles), where they are generally too closely apposed to be resolved from each other.If available on the microscope, activate the auto-focus system to maintain focus over the course of timelapse imaging.Acquire a brightfield reference image. Keep the laser power low to minimize photobleaching, with exposure time adjusted accordingly to detect the faint signal. As an example, representative data were acquired at 5% laser power and 4 s exposures. The region must encompass all the axons to be photoactivated.Determine optimal settings for photoactivation with 405 nm illumination.NOTE: Only perform this step and sub-steps prior to first experimental activation. The region must encompass all the axons to be photoactivated.Determine optimal settings for photoactivation with 405 nm illumination.NOTE: Only perform this step and sub-steps prior to first experimental activation. The region must encompass all the axons to be photoactivated.Determine optimal settings for photoactivation with 405 nm illumination.NOTE: Only perform this step and sub-steps prior to first experimental activation. The region must encompass all the axons to be photoactivated.Determine optimal settings for photoactivation with 405 nm illumination.NOTE: Only perform this step and sub-steps prior to first experimental activation. The region must encompass all the axons to be photoactivated.Determine optimal settings for photoactivation with 405 nm illumination.NOTE: Only perform this step and sub-steps prior to first experimental activation. For the pulse-escape method, an acquisition period of 30–150 minutes with 5 or 10 minute timelapse intervals permits analysis of the long-term pausing behavior of the filamentsSave all images acquired, as well as the ROI used for fluorescence activation.Move to a new region of the nerve and repeat steps 5.1–5.11. 6.Flatfield and darkfield image acquisitionMake a solution of fluorescein by adding 250 mg of fluorescein powder to 0.5 mL of double distilled water. This z-stack acquisition is necessary to capture the maximal fluorescence across the field of view as the coverslip is rarely perfectly horizontal and the plane of fluorescein fluorescence is very narrow. Create an average intensity projection of this stack by clicking Image | Stacks | Z Project and selecting Average Intensity from the dropdown menu to generate the flatfield image.Subtract the darkfield image from the flatfield image by clicking Process | Image Calculator, selecting Subtract as the operation. Ensure that the 32-bit (float) result option is checked. Ensure that the 32-bit (float) result option is checked. Ensure that the 32-bit (float) result option is checked. 