However, interest in targeting melatonin receptors to treat the symptoms of mood disorders was reinvigorated by the discovery of agomelatine, a novel antidepressant that acts through synergistic actions at the melatonin receptors and 5-HT2C receptor (36, 37). The antidepressant-like effects of luzindole, a melatonin receptor antagonist, may appear contradictory to that of MT1/MT2 melatonin receptor agonists such as agomelatine. In clinical studies, agomelatine phase advances rhythms in core body temperature when given in the late afternoon (99, 100). Chronic agomelatine administration promotes brain-derived neurotrophic factor expression, leading to a net increase in hippocampal neurogenesis in rodents (92, 104). Chronic administration of 5-HT2C receptor antagonists increases neural progenitor cell proliferation in rodent hippocampus (93), whereas chronic melatonin administration increases neuronal differentiation and immature neuron survival (83, 84, 93). The clinical significance of the melatonin receptors in dementia is strongly supported by postmortem histology studies in hippocampus from Alzheimer’s disease patients showing increased MT1 and decreased MT2 receptor immunoreactivity (106, 107). Therefore, a melatonin receptor antagonist may lead to improvements in memory-based tasks and may be useful in a prophylactic or therapeutic role in patients showing signs of Alzheimer’s disease. Thus, melatonin receptors may be viable targets for novel agents capable of counteracting the oxidative stress components of neuroinflammatory processes.Melatonin inhibits mitochondrial cell death pathways in a mutant striatal cell model of Huntington’s disease. Assessing the pharmacology and function of melatonin receptors is challenging, as their native binding site densities in animal tissues are low or undetectable, particularly for the MT2 receptor (9). Assessing the pharmacology and function of melatonin receptors is challenging, as their native binding site densities in animal tissues are low or undetectable, particularly for the MT2 receptor (9). Assessing the pharmacology and function of melatonin receptors is challenging, as their native binding site densities in animal tissues are low or undetectable, particularly for the MT2 receptor (9). Together, these data suggest a role for the MT2 receptor in mediating the neuroprotective effects of melatonin following ischemia/reperfusion, as well as an association with a robust increase in neurogenesis. This diurnal variation is not observed in C57BL/6J mice (127), which are considered melatonin-deficient owing to a truncation of the arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase gene (131). This diurnal variation is not observed in C57BL/6J mice (127), which are considered melatonin-deficient owing to a truncation of the arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase gene (131). This diurnal variation is not observed in C57BL/6J mice (127), which are considered melatonin-deficient owing to a truncation of the arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase gene (131). This diurnal variation is not observed in C57BL/6J mice (127), which are considered melatonin-deficient owing to a truncation of the arylalkylamine N-acetyltransferase gene (131). These findings suggest a potential link between nocturnal melatonin and the lack of sensitization during the dark phase.Researchers have linked melatonin receptors to sensitization induced by the psychostimulant methamphetamine. This diurnal variation is abolished by pinealectomy (128). Together, these results suggest that melatonin abrogates the rewarding properties of morphine through the MT2 receptor (132). Together, these results suggest that melatonin abrogates the rewarding properties of morphine through the MT2 receptor (132). Thus, melatonin appears to act through its receptors to inhibit methamphetamine-induced reward, and antagonists of the MT1 and MT2 receptors may have the capacity to block the induction of the methamphetamine-induced reward sensation. Here we summarize the oncostatic properties of melatonin and its receptors in breast and prostate cancers models, with particular focus on the MT1 receptor. In contrast, melatonin-rich blood collected at night inhibits human breast cancer growth, which is blocked by a melatonin receptor antagonist (S20928) (140), suggesting nocturnal endogenous serum melatonin inhibits breast cancer growth by receptor-mediated mechanisms. MT2 melatonin receptor mRNA is either absent or expressed at a low density. MT2 melatonin receptor mRNA is either absent or expressed at a low density. MT2 melatonin receptor mRNA is either absent or expressed at a low density. The MT1 receptor mRNA expression level varies among different breast cancer cell lines and primary breast tumors and is modulated by exogenous estrogen and melatonin treatment (143). Luzindole and 4P-PDOT competitively block MT1 melatonin receptors at concentrations of 300 nM or more, and both act as inverse agonists in systems endowed with constitutively active MT1 receptors (17–19). This review describes the latest advancements on the role of melatonin receptors as therapeutic targets for the development of drugs aimed at the treatment of sleep and circadian disorders, depression, and cancer. Described below are potential therapeutic targets for the melatonin receptor types. Described below are potential therapeutic targets for the melatonin receptor types. Learning and MemoryDeletion or blockade of the melatonin receptors results in increased LTP as well as improved performance in learning and memory tasks. Therefore, melatonin receptor antagonists may promote increased learning and memory and may thus be useful in ameliorating the symptoms of dementia, particularly Alzheimer’s disease. Thus, melatonin receptor antagonists may provide useful treatments in ameliorating the symptoms of drug abuse. The MT1 melatonin receptor mediates the oncostatic effect of melatonin in breast and prostate cancer models. When establishing ligand efficacy and selectivity, investigators must also consider the observation that simultaneous activation of both MT1 and MT2 melatonin receptors expressed in the same or different cells could lead to additive, synergistic, or opposing responses that amplify or diminish each other (29–31). Formation of MT1/MT2 heterodimers is 3- to 4-fold lower than the formation of MT1/MT1 homodimers and is similar to the formation of MT2/MT2 homodimers (32) (Figure 2). Monomeric forms of the MT1 or MT2 receptors, however, are differentially desensitized by exposure to melatonin depending on concentration (physiological versus supraphysiological), time of exposure (e.g., short versus long) (33–35), cellular background (7), and receptor state (quiescent versus constitutive) (33–35). Monomeric forms of the MT1 or MT2 receptors, however, are differentially desensitized by exposure to melatonin depending on concentration (physiological versus supraphysiological), time of exposure (e.g., short versus long) (33–35), cellular background (7), and receptor state (quiescent versus constitutive) (33–35). Thus, ligands with higher affinity or selectivity for the MT1 or the MT2 receptor could conceivably tip the MT1/MT2 heterodimeric receptor selectivity balance, providing a therapeutic advantage over melatonin and current nonselective synthetic ligands by potentiating or facilitating responses mediated by the target receptor. Endogenous melatonin released from the pineal gland at night may feedback onto the SCN and activate MT1 and MT2 receptors to phase shift local and overt circadian rhythms (Figure 1). The MT2/5-HT2C receptor heterodimer exhibits a Gi signaling response to melatonin and agomelatine, i.e., inhibition of forskolin-stimulated cAMP production (36). The MT2/5-HT2C receptor heterodimer exhibits a Gi signaling response to melatonin and agomelatine, i.e., inhibition of forskolin-stimulated cAMP production (36). The MT2/5-HT2C receptor heterodimer exhibits a Gi signaling response to melatonin and agomelatine, i.e., inhibition of forskolin-stimulated cAMP production (36). Moreover, MT1 and 5-HT2C heterodimeric receptor formation increases 5-HT2C receptor trafficking to the cell surface and potentiates β-arrestin recruitment induced by melatonin and 5-HT (36). Moreover, MT1 and 5-HT2C heterodimeric receptor formation increases 5-HT2C receptor trafficking to the cell surface and potentiates β-arrestin recruitment induced by melatonin and 5-HT (36). Thus, melatonin receptor heterodimerization (Figure 2) with 5-HT2C receptor and possibly other receptor types generates additional signaling responses with therapeutic potential that should be explored as new melatonin-like drugs are developed. Ramelteon shows a 10-fold higher affinity for the hMT1 than the hMT2 melatonin receptor and a 17-fold higher affinity than melatonin (42). Ramelteon shows a 10-fold higher affinity for the hMT1 than the hMT2 melatonin receptor and a 17-fold higher affinity than melatonin (42). Ramelteon shows a 10-fold higher affinity for the hMT1 than the hMT2 melatonin receptor and a 17-fold higher affinity than melatonin (42). This review thus focuses on the actions of exogenous melatonin and melatonin drugs on functional melatonin receptors associated with therapeutic effects, specifically those affecting the central nervous system and cancer (Figure 1). The only exception is agomelatine, which shows high affinity for MT1 and MT2 melatonin receptors but is also an antagonist at the 5-HT2C serotonin receptor, a property believed to contribute to its antidepressant effects (for a review, see Reference 37). Melatonin can be used effectively to entrain free-running circadian rhythms in totally blind individuals not perceiving light (52) and to phase advance delayed rhythms in individuals suffering from seasonal affective disorders, with concurrent improvement of depression scores (53). Melatonin can be used effectively to entrain free-running circadian rhythms in totally blind individuals not perceiving light (52) and to phase advance delayed rhythms in individuals suffering from seasonal affective disorders, with concurrent improvement of depression scores (53). These two distinct effects of melatonin (i.e., sleep promotion and phase shift of circadian rhythms) resulting from actions at melatonin receptors in the central nervous system are reviewed below in relation to the therapeutic targets of marketed melatonin drugs (Table 1).Insomnia, or sleep-wake disorder, is defined as difficulty initiating and/or maintaining sleep or as nonrestorative sleep and is generally associated with daytime impairment or distress. Emphasis is placed on drugs currently on the market targeting MT1 and MT2 melatonin receptors for the treatment of insomnia, circadian sleep disorders, major depression, and cancer (Table 1). Melatonin receptor activation decreases neuronal firing through activation of the MT1 receptor in the SCN and areas of the limbic system, which may mediate the sleep-promoting properties of melatonin (9, 14).Activation of melatonin receptors in the SCN plays a pivotal role in coordinating the phase and amplitude of circadian rhythms throughout the body (60). The clinical use of Circadin is not associated with memory impairment or decreased vigilance and has no significant withdrawal symptoms (56).Ramelteon, a high-affinity MT1 and MT2 melatonin receptor agonist (42), promotes sleep in various mammalian species, including humans, without causing learning, memory, or motor function impairment or inducing reward (69, 70). In summary, tasimelteon modulates sleep and circadian rhythms, providing a highly effective treatment for a range of symptoms associated with transmeridian air travel, shift work, and other circadian-rhythm sleep disorders, including those observed in blind people.The melatonin agonists noted above (Table 1) are nonselective at the MT1 and MT2 melatonin receptor ligands. Furthermore, the selective MT2 agonist IIK7 produced similar effects on the latency and amount of NREM (76), suggesting that the MT2 melatonin receptor mediates some of the effects of melatonin agonists on sleep architecture. The human MT1 and MT2 (hMT1 and hMT2) melatonin receptors show distinct molecular structures (5), pharmacological characteristics (3, 6, 7), and chromosomal sites (4q35.1 for MT1, 11q21–q22 for MT2) (8). Additionally, long-term use leads to unwanted side effects such as sexual dysfunction, weight gain, and a cluster of cognitive, autonomic, and motor signs that constitute the serotonin syndrome (79, 80). 