Definition and electrophysiological applicationFunctional connectivity is defined as the temporal coincidence of spatially distant neurophysiological events.2 The assumption behind this connectivity approach is that areas are presumed to be components of the same network if their time courses are consistently correlated. Nevertheless, it is often regarded as not adding substantial new information above the observation of jointly activated regions in a conventional fMRI analysis. Supporting this view simulation studies show that one may generate patterns similar to resting state fluctuations by injecting stochastic activity in structural networks defined by anatomical connectivity information.57 On the other hand, some patterns of functional “resting state” connectivity exist, which cannot be explained by anatomical connections. When lying in an MRI scanner without a specific task we are not thus resting but instead performing all sorts of mental operations in succession or parallel. These enabled completely new approaches to task-based functional connectivity analysis.68-70 Such resources, like the BrainMap (http://brainmap.org/) or Caret database (http://brainvis.wustl.edu/wiki/index.php/), contain a summary of the results of several thousands of functional neuroimaging experiments. These enabled completely new approaches to task-based functional connectivity analysis.68-70 Such resources, like the BrainMap (http://brainmap.org/) or Caret database (http://brainvis.wustl.edu/wiki/index.php/), contain a summary of the results of several thousands of functional neuroimaging experiments. Given the high standardization of neuroimaging data reports and in particular the ubiquitous adherence to standard coordinate systems (such as the MNI system), the results reported in these studies can be readily compared with each other with respect to the spatial location of significant neural activity. Such multi-modal analyses should then help the understanding of how mental capacities emerge from a network of specialized but interacting regions. Such multi-modal analyses should then help the understanding of how mental capacities emerge from a network of specialized but interacting regions. Such multi-modal analyses should then help the understanding of how mental capacities emerge from a network of specialized but interacting regions. Such multi-modal analyses should then help the understanding of how mental capacities emerge from a network of specialized but interacting regions. Second, strong but non-matching evidence obtained from both analyses, however, may relate to the fundamental differences between two states. Relation to regional specializationIn contrast to the assessment of anatomical connectivity, which is closely related to the regional differentiation of brain (micro-) structure, functional connectivity is conceptually much closer related to the regional specialization of brain function. Relation to regional specializationIn contrast to the assessment of anatomical connectivity, which is closely related to the regional differentiation of brain (micro-) structure, functional connectivity is conceptually much closer related to the regional specialization of brain function. Relation to regional specializationIn contrast to the assessment of anatomical connectivity, which is closely related to the regional differentiation of brain (micro-) structure, functional connectivity is conceptually much closer related to the regional specialization of brain function. Relation to regional specializationIn contrast to the assessment of anatomical connectivity, which is closely related to the regional differentiation of brain (micro-) structure, functional connectivity is conceptually much closer related to the regional specialization of brain function. As noted above, there is growing consensus that functional connectivity in the task-free state reflects, similar to task-based functional connectivity, the degree to which different brain regions are involved in the same functional networks. As noted above, there is growing consensus that functional connectivity in the task-free state reflects, similar to task-based functional connectivity, the degree to which different brain regions are involved in the same functional networks. As noted above, there is growing consensus that functional connectivity in the task-free state reflects, similar to task-based functional connectivity, the degree to which different brain regions are involved in the same functional networks. As noted above, there is growing consensus that functional connectivity in the task-free state reflects, similar to task-based functional connectivity, the degree to which different brain regions are involved in the same functional networks. As noted above, there is growing consensus that functional connectivity in the task-free state reflects, similar to task-based functional connectivity, the degree to which different brain regions are involved in the same functional networks. As noted above, there is growing consensus that functional connectivity in the task-free state reflects, similar to task-based functional connectivity, the degree to which different brain regions are involved in the same functional networks. As noted above, there is growing consensus that functional connectivity in the task-free state reflects, similar to task-based functional connectivity, the degree to which different brain regions are involved in the same functional networks. This perspective is much sharpened, if multiple seed regions are employed. This perspective is much sharpened, if multiple seed regions are employed. This perspective is much sharpened, if multiple seed regions are employed. This perspective is much sharpened, if multiple seed regions are employed. This perspective is much sharpened, if multiple seed regions are employed. What can we learn from functional connectivity?The fact that functional connectivity analyses are fundamentally correlative in nature represents both their major strength and mostly severe drawback. What can we learn from functional connectivity?The fact that functional connectivity analyses are fundamentally correlative in nature represents both their major strength and mostly severe drawback. What can we learn from functional connectivity?The fact that functional connectivity analyses are fundamentally correlative in nature represents both their major strength and mostly severe drawback. This has led to the common custom of representing effective connectivity analyses as directed graphs, where nodes represent the individual brain regions that were either included in the analysis or inferred from it. This has led to the common custom of representing effective connectivity analyses as directed graphs, where nodes represent the individual brain regions that were either included in the analysis or inferred from it. This has led to the common custom of representing effective connectivity analyses as directed graphs, where nodes represent the individual brain regions that were either included in the analysis or inferred from it. This has led to the common custom of representing effective connectivity analyses as directed graphs, where nodes represent the individual brain regions that were either included in the analysis or inferred from it. Examples for the former would be PPIs and DCM, the probably prime example for the latter is SEM. Finally, modeling schemes may also differ with respect to the level of hemodynamic modeling involved.81-83 All of the approaches discussed here estimate effective connectivity from fMRI time series, which presents a challenge to the estimation of effective connectivity, since fMRI measurements do not reflect any neuronal signal directly but clearly after its convolution with a hemodynamic response function (HRF).84 Evidently, interactions in the brain should be expressed at the neuronal level instead of at the (measureable) level of hemodynamic responses. While there is no statistical approach to disentangle this ambiguity, it has to be remembered that both main effects are also specified in the design-matrix as confound regressors and can therefore be used to identify the relationship of the interaction with the respective main effects.In practice, PPI analysis does not require performance of separate regression analyses. It has been suggested to first de-convolve the time-series of the seed region, hereby estimating its neuronal states.85,86 The interaction term between the de-convolved physiological regressor and the psychological factor is then again convolved with a canonical hemodynamic response function to represent a more faithful predictor of a PPI effect. The observed signal time-series in each voxel of the brain is regressed on this interaction term as well as on the physiological (time-series of the seed) and psychological (experimental context) time-series used as confound regressors. Inclusion of these latter regressors of no interest is crucial to remove the main effects of either factor from the variance explained by the PPI regressor and thus remove confounding, e.g., stimulus-locked effects. Inclusion of these latter regressors of no interest is crucial to remove the main effects of either factor from the variance explained by the PPI regressor and thus remove confounding, e.g., stimulus-locked effects. Apart from temporal precedence, the second fundamental assumption in GCM is predictability. If the activation history of region X helps to predict the current values of Y but not vice versa, X has an influence on Y. Conversely, if Y helps to predict X but not the other way around, Y has an influence on X. If the activation history of region X helps to predict the current values of Y but not vice versa, X has an influence on Y. Conversely, if Y helps to predict X but not the other way around, Y has an influence on X. What, however, happens if both past time series help predicting each other? A vector autoregressive model is then fitted at each voxel of the brain, assessing the degree to which prior information from the reference region improve predictability of the current target voxel and vice versa.78 In contrast to PPI analyses, which are only concerned with the influence of the seed on the rest of the brain, GCM thus enables delineation of regions influenced by the seeds as well as those regions that in turn influence the seed region. Regional functional specializationFunctional neuroimaging by positron emission tomography (PET) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) enables the in-vivo investigation of functional specialization in the human brain.13-19 Based on local changes in cerebral blood flow, glucose or oxygen metabolism, these techniques allow the identification of regionally specific increases in neural activation under a certain motor, sensory or cognitive task across the whole brain simultaneously. Regional functional specializationFunctional neuroimaging by positron emission tomography (PET) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) enables the in-vivo investigation of functional specialization in the human brain.13-19 Based on local changes in cerebral blood flow, glucose or oxygen metabolism, these techniques allow the identification of regionally specific increases in neural activation under a certain motor, sensory or cognitive task across the whole brain simultaneously. Regional functional specializationFunctional neuroimaging by positron emission tomography (PET) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) enables the in-vivo investigation of functional specialization in the human brain.13-19 Based on local changes in cerebral blood flow, glucose or oxygen metabolism, these techniques allow the identification of regionally specific increases in neural activation under a certain motor, sensory or cognitive task across the whole brain simultaneously. Regional functional specializationFunctional neuroimaging by positron emission tomography (PET) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) enables the in-vivo investigation of functional specialization in the human brain.13-19 Based on local changes in cerebral blood flow, glucose or oxygen metabolism, these techniques allow the identification of regionally specific increases in neural activation under a certain motor, sensory or cognitive task across the whole brain simultaneously. The model parameters, i.e., path coefficients representing connection strengths, are then optimized such as the discrepancy between the covariance-structure of the measured data and that implied by the model is minimal. The model parameters, i.e., path coefficients representing connection strengths, are then optimized such as the discrepancy between the covariance-structure of the measured data and that implied by the model is minimal. The model parameters, i.e., path coefficients representing connection strengths, are then optimized such as the discrepancy between the covariance-structure of the measured data and that implied by the model is minimal. In this context, three aspects deserve special attention when SEM is applied to fMRI rather than, as originally proposed, PET data. These assumptions certainly met the case in PET images which are usually acquired over the course of several minutes while the subjects are constantly engaged in a particular task, but are more difficult to ascertain in fMRI time-series. On the other hand, the model parameters are fitted to represent the covariance structure of the measured (hemodynamic or metabolic) data, not the underlying neuronal activity. Model-based confirmatory analyses have major advantages over exploratory strategies, as they represent an approach to explicitly test hypotheses about interactions in neuronal systems. The ensuing changes in neuronal activity states in turn cause changes in the blood oxygen level-dependent (BOLD) signal observable with fMRI. These neuronal dynamics then give rise to externally assessable outputs such as BOLD signal changes which are explicitly modeled in DCM by a set of differential equations. These neuronal dynamics then give rise to externally assessable outputs such as BOLD signal changes which are explicitly modeled in DCM by a set of differential equations. The modeled neuronal dynamics are then linked to the observable changes in the BOLD response via a biophysically validated hemodynamic forward model translating neuronal states into predicted measurements.51 In DCM, effective connectivity within a given brain network is inferred from the coupling parameters computed for the hidden neuronal states. The parameters of the model that best translate the input functions based on the experimental design into the measured time-series may be estimated by Bayesian inversion. Moreover, although model selection may allow to identify the most likely model given the measured data, inference is evidently limited to the models included into the comparison which may only reflect a small proportion of the potential full model space. The notion of causalityThe fundamental definition of effective connectivity relates to the influence of one area over another.2 Consequently, effective connectivity is commonly framed in terms of (implicit or explicit) causality, e.g., “area X inhibits area Y”. The notion of causalityThe fundamental definition of effective connectivity relates to the influence of one area over another.2 Consequently, effective connectivity is commonly framed in terms of (implicit or explicit) causality, e.g., “area X inhibits area Y”. The notion of causalityThe fundamental definition of effective connectivity relates to the influence of one area over another.2 Consequently, effective connectivity is commonly framed in terms of (implicit or explicit) causality, e.g., “area X inhibits area Y”. Thus, while all approaches to effective connectivity analysis evoke a notion of causality, these differ between the different analysis concepts.In PPI, causality is understood as the contribution of another area to the local signal time-course and is thus inferred from dependencies revealed by context-dependent regression of a regional time-series on the activity in another brain region.In GCM causality is framed as predictability and temporal precedence, and parameterized in an increased predictability of current activity in area X by adding information about the history of a distant area Y to the history of X. As noted above, fMRI and PET are excellent tools to identify the regions recruited by a mental operation but cannot distinct the borders of cortical modules. As noted above, fMRI and PET are excellent tools to identify the regions recruited by a mental operation but cannot distinct the borders of cortical modules. As noted above, fMRI and PET are excellent tools to identify the regions recruited by a mental operation but cannot distinct the borders of cortical modules. As noted above, fMRI and PET are excellent tools to identify the regions recruited by a mental operation but cannot distinct the borders of cortical modules. What can we learn from effective connectivity?The strength and drawbacks of effective connectivity modeling are largely the mirror reverses of those discussed for functional connectivity analyses. What can we learn from effective connectivity?The strength and drawbacks of effective connectivity modeling are largely the mirror reverses of those discussed for functional connectivity analyses. Evidently, the precise nature of transmitted information remains obscure, but context dependency of promoting or inhibitory influence often enables to ascribe more specific functional roles to a particular area as would have been possible from the pure observation of task specific activations. Evidently, the precise nature of transmitted information remains obscure, but context dependency of promoting or inhibitory influence often enables to ascribe more specific functional roles to a particular area as would have been possible from the pure observation of task specific activations. Evidently, the precise nature of transmitted information remains obscure, but context dependency of promoting or inhibitory influence often enables to ascribe more specific functional roles to a particular area as would have been possible from the pure observation of task specific activations. Most approaches additionally evoke choices on model parameters ranging from the order of a multivariate autoregression to a particular hemodynamic model.80,89 On the deepest level, the various approaches available for modeling effective connectivity also differ in their concepts about brain dynamics. Most approaches additionally evoke choices on model parameters ranging from the order of a multivariate autoregression to a particular hemodynamic model.80,89 On the deepest level, the various approaches available for modeling effective connectivity also differ in their concepts about brain dynamics. Most approaches additionally evoke choices on model parameters ranging from the order of a multivariate autoregression to a particular hemodynamic model.80,89 On the deepest level, the various approaches available for modeling effective connectivity also differ in their concepts about brain dynamics. Do borders of microstructure and anatomical connectivity patterns coincide? Do borders of microstructure and anatomical connectivity patterns coincide? This is not only in clear contrast to classical anatomical brain atlases that present observer-dependent parcelations of one or a few brains as schematic surface views. This is not only in clear contrast to classical anatomical brain atlases that present observer-dependent parcelations of one or a few brains as schematic surface views. What is the explanation of the involvement of some regions in many different tasks? Regional structure-function relationshipsThese advances in the mapping of regional specialization led to the description of mental processes that recruit a specific, structurally defined, area. How do results from different approaches towards effective connectivity analyses relate to each other under the same context? How do results from different approaches towards effective connectivity analyses relate to each other under the same context? Classical approaches to anatomical connectivityAnatomical connectivity denotes the presence of fiber connections between two areas in the brain, or — more specifically — between neurons. Classical approaches to anatomical connectivityAnatomical connectivity denotes the presence of fiber connections between two areas in the brain, or — more specifically — between neurons. Classical approaches to anatomical connectivityAnatomical connectivity denotes the presence of fiber connections between two areas in the brain, or — more specifically — between neurons. This long-standing discrepancy between highly precise and specific anatomical connectivity measures in non-human primates on one hand and the relatively coarse and limited methods available for the investigation of the human brain may explain why in particular anatomical connectivity of the human brain is often compared and referenced against that in non-human primates. This long-standing discrepancy between highly precise and specific anatomical connectivity measures in non-human primates on one hand and the relatively coarse and limited methods available for the investigation of the human brain may explain why in particular anatomical connectivity of the human brain is often compared and referenced against that in non-human primates. This long-standing discrepancy between highly precise and specific anatomical connectivity measures in non-human primates on one hand and the relatively coarse and limited methods available for the investigation of the human brain may explain why in particular anatomical connectivity of the human brain is often compared and referenced against that in non-human primates. This long-standing discrepancy between highly precise and specific anatomical connectivity measures in non-human primates on one hand and the relatively coarse and limited methods available for the investigation of the human brain may explain why in particular anatomical connectivity of the human brain is often compared and referenced against that in non-human primates. This long-standing discrepancy between highly precise and specific anatomical connectivity measures in non-human primates on one hand and the relatively coarse and limited methods available for the investigation of the human brain may explain why in particular anatomical connectivity of the human brain is often compared and referenced against that in non-human primates. The first is the direction of its principal axis, which corresponds to the direction of greatest diffusion (the principal diffusion direction, PDD). The first is the direction of its principal axis, which corresponds to the direction of greatest diffusion (the principal diffusion direction, PDD). The second important feature of the diffusion ellipsoid is its anisotropy, which corresponds to the preponderance of diffusion to follow the PDD relative to all other directions. The second important feature of the diffusion ellipsoid is its anisotropy, which corresponds to the preponderance of diffusion to follow the PDD relative to all other directions. Given the dynamic of the field and the constantly evolving methods and modeling approaches, the reader may be referred to the methodological papers describing the various methods for modeling diffusion directions and performing tractography.45-49 Assessment of, e.g., the number of samples in probabilistic tractography that reached a particular target from a specific seed region, is not a valid approach for quantifying the strength of a fiber bundle. Such parameters also reflect the probability of how likely it is to reach that particular target in a random journey along the principle diffusion directions relative to all other possible locations that could be reached. This may, in the most extreme cases, lead to the problematic view that connections that have not been found in monkeys are regarded as false positives in human DWI data while connections obtained in tracer studies that are not replicated are regarded as false negatives. First, axonal tracing also does not have perfect reliability. 