TβRII protein levels were substantially downregulated as early as 3 h of DHT addition and persisted at the same level up to 48 h, whereas no change in TβRI protein levels was observed at any of the time points tested (Fig. 3B) suggested a transcriptional mechanism. 4B), consistent with protein and mRNA levels. The full-length TβRII promoter construct, pTβRII(−1670/+38)-luc, although less active, was almost completely (> 90%) suppressed by DHT under the same conditions in DU145 + AR cells (Supplementary Fig. 4B).To identify the specific promoter region responsible for suppression by DHT, cells were transiently transfected with various 5′ end truncations of TβRII promoter-luciferase constructs (41) (Fig. 4B).To identify the specific promoter region responsible for suppression by DHT, cells were transiently transfected with various 5′ end truncations of TβRII promoter-luciferase constructs (41) (Fig. In the case of TβRII promoter, Sp1 has been shown to be critical in transcriptional initiation of TβRII, as it is TATA-less. In the case of TβRII promoter, Sp1 has been shown to be critical in transcriptional initiation of TβRII, as it is TATA-less. In the case of TβRII promoter, Sp1 has been shown to be critical in transcriptional initiation of TβRII, as it is TATA-less. All deletion constructs of this promoter tested (Fig. 4C) contain either one or two Sp1 sites at −143 and −25. As expected, mutation of the −25 Sp1 site abolished promoter activity in both DU145 and NRP-154 cells, suggesting this Sp1 site functions as a transcriptional start site. As expected, mutation of the −25 Sp1 site abolished promoter activity in both DU145 and NRP-154 cells, suggesting this Sp1 site functions as a transcriptional start site. Sp3 binds to the same Sp1 response elements, but may either activate or repress transcription, depending of context of other response elements or transcription regulators. Similar results were obtained with NRP-154 + AR and VCaP cells (Fig. Similar results were obtained with NRP-154 + AR and VCaP cells (Fig. Similar results were obtained with NRP-154 + AR and VCaP cells (Fig. Similar results were obtained with NRP-154 + AR and VCaP cells (Fig. Androgen-stimulated AR significantly diminished DNA binding to WT but not mutant Sp1-oligonucleotide (Supplementary Fig. MaterialsSources were: Recombinant human TGF-β1 (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN); PNGase F (New England Biolab, Ipswich, MA); pGL3-basic-luciferase (Promega, Madison, WI); Sp1 consensus (sc-2502) and mutant (sc-2503) oligonucleotides (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA); characterized Fetal Bovine Serum (FBS) and dextran-charcoal stripped FBS (DC) (HyClone, Logan, UT); CellTiter 96® Non-Radioactive Cell Proliferation Assay Kit (Promega, Madison, WI); Western blot antibodies- see supplemental material. This mechanism is likely to function cooperatively with another mechanism we previously described (11), involving the direct binding of active Smad3 to AR which blocks the interaction of Smad3 with SBE on target genes. Preliminary RT-PCR data from NRP-154+AR cells show levels of Sp1 mRNA were not significantly altered by DHT (Supplementary Fig. Preliminary RT-PCR data from NRP-154+AR cells show levels of Sp1 mRNA were not significantly altered by DHT (Supplementary Fig. Preliminary RT-PCR data from NRP-154+AR cells show levels of Sp1 mRNA were not significantly altered by DHT (Supplementary Fig. Transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), which is a multifunctional cytokine with an important role as a potent tumor suppressor in a variety of tissues including the prostate (1–7), propagates signals through two transmembrane serine/threonine receptor kinases, namely TGF-β receptor type I (TβRI) and II (TβRII), which directly activate Smads 2 and 3 through phosphorylating their two C-terminal serine residues (8–10). Transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), which is a multifunctional cytokine with an important role as a potent tumor suppressor in a variety of tissues including the prostate (1–7), propagates signals through two transmembrane serine/threonine receptor kinases, namely TGF-β receptor type I (TβRI) and II (TβRII), which directly activate Smads 2 and 3 through phosphorylating their two C-terminal serine residues (8–10). Transforming growth factor-β (TGF-β), which is a multifunctional cytokine with an important role as a potent tumor suppressor in a variety of tissues including the prostate (1–7), propagates signals through two transmembrane serine/threonine receptor kinases, namely TGF-β receptor type I (TβRI) and II (TβRII), which directly activate Smads 2 and 3 through phosphorylating their two C-terminal serine residues (8–10). In fact, even exogenous TβRII was difficult to detect in C4-2 cells. In fact, even exogenous TβRII was difficult to detect in C4-2 cells. Based on these observations and ideas, we propose that constitutive activation of AR during prostate cancer progression may cause loss of the tumor suppressor function of TGF-β in prostate carcinoma cells, thus aiding in tumor progression. Based on these observations and ideas, we propose that constitutive activation of AR during prostate cancer progression may cause loss of the tumor suppressor function of TGF-β in prostate carcinoma cells, thus aiding in tumor progression. Regardless of the specific mechanisms involved, loss of growth suppression/apoptosis by TGF-β is likely to enhance tumor growth. Thus, restoring TGF-β responses in androgen-independent epithelial cells, perhaps by intercepting the ability of AR to disrupt TGF-β signaling, is likely to have important therapeutic implications. Unless indicated, all experiments in NRP-154 and NRP-152 cells, were performed in 1% DC-GM3 medium, and experiments involving DU145, LNCaP, C4-2B, and VCaP cells, were performed in DMEM/F12 supplemented with 1% or 10% DC-stripped FBS and 15 mM HEPES. Experiments in LNCaP and C4-2B cells transiently infected with Admax-TβRII were performed in DMEM/F12 supplemented with 1% DC-stripped FBS, 15 mM HEPES, and 20 ng/ml EGF. In brief, NRP-154/AR4 cells were plated at a density of 5 × 103 cells/100 μl/well in 96 well plates with 1% DC-GM3 medium with ± 2 μg/ml doxycyclin and ± DHT. Cells were then washed twice with 1X PBS and dye was eluted by adding 1% Triton/PBS. The eluted dye was subjected to spectrophotometry at 550 nm. Taq Polymerase Master Mix (Promega, Madison, WI) was used for PCR amplification of rat TβRII, using 32 or 28 cycles, respectively, of the following temperature gradients: 95°C for 15 sec, 60°C for 30 sec, and 72 °C for 2 min. DNA was purified and internucleosomal DNA fragmentation was detected using TACS apoptosis DNA ladder kit (Trevigen, Gaithersburg, MD) according to manufacturer’s instructions. DNA was purified and internucleosomal DNA fragmentation was detected using TACS apoptosis DNA ladder kit (Trevigen, Gaithersburg, MD) according to manufacturer’s instructions. For each reaction, 1.5 μg of dimer was incubated for 15 min at room temperature with 50 μl of Dynabeads® M-280 streptavidin (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) washed twice with 2 X B&W buffer (10 mM Tris-Cl (pH 7.5), 1 mM EDTA, 2 M NaCl). 100 μg nuclear protein was incubated with oligo-conjugated beads and reaction volume was adjusted up to 500 μl with 1 X DNAP containing Complete EDTA-free Protease inhibitor Mixture (Roche, Mannheim, Germany), 1mM sodium orthovanadate, 1 mM phenymethylsulfonyl floride, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM β-glycerophosphate, and 1 mM DTT. Eluates were subjected to Western blot analysis. AR-inducible cell lines, Western blots, Preparation of nuclear and cytosolic extractSee supplemental section. AR-inducible cell lines, Western blots, Preparation of nuclear and cytosolic extractSee supplemental section. AR-inducible cell lines, Western blots, Preparation of nuclear and cytosolic extractSee supplemental section. AR-inducible cell lines, Western blots, Preparation of nuclear and cytosolic extractSee supplemental section. Fourty-eight h of TGF-β1 treatment killed essentially all cells infected with the control or AR virus, whereas treatment with 1 or 10 nM DHT significantly protected AR expressing cells against killing by TGF-β1 (Fig. 1S B).To examine the duration of such protection, we next assessed changes in total viable cells after allowing the TGF-β ± DHT treated cultures (5 days) to recover in their normal growth medium without exogenous TGF-β or DHT for 4 to 10 days. Our data supported that as little as 0.1 nM DHT enormously protected the cells from TGF-β1-induced apoptosis, as no cells survived the effects of TGF-β unless protected by DHT, giving rise to >104-fold increases in total cell number with DHT versus without DHT (Fig. We next tested the possibility that androgen treatment can reverse the ability of TGF-β1 to reduce cyclin D expression. Similar experiments were performed in LNCaP and C4-2B cells infected with AdMax-TβRII. Similar experiments were performed in LNCaP and C4-2B cells infected with AdMax-TβRII. Similar experiments were performed in LNCaP and C4-2B cells infected with AdMax-TβRII. DHT downregulates expression of TβRII, but not TβRIWe previously reported that androgens disrupt the binding of Smad3 to SBE through a direct association of AR with Smad3 (11). 