Collectively, these data suggest that the enhanced cell killing by the combined treatments is attributable to the augmented induction of apoptosis. Collectively, these data suggest that the enhanced cell killing by the combined treatments is attributable to the augmented induction of apoptosis. Collectively, these data suggest that the enhanced cell killing by the combined treatments is attributable to the augmented induction of apoptosis. Collectively, these data suggest that the enhanced cell killing by the combined treatments is attributable to the augmented induction of apoptosis. Collectively, these data suggest that the enhanced cell killing by the combined treatments is attributable to the augmented induction of apoptosis. Collectively, these data suggest that the enhanced cell killing by the combined treatments is attributable to the augmented induction of apoptosis. Collectively, these data suggest that the enhanced cell killing by the combined treatments is attributable to the augmented induction of apoptosis. 3B shows that transfections of pGL3-TRAIL2 containing a 504 bp fragment upstream of translational start site results in an approximately 2.5-fold increase in luciferase activity in response to MS275 treatment, as compared to untreated cells. 3B, although adriamycin alone had no effects on the TRAIL promoter activity, the combination of MS275 with adriamycin resulted in a more pronounced increase in the activation of the TRAIL promoter as compared to cells treated with MS275 alone. 3B, although adriamycin alone had no effects on the TRAIL promoter activity, the combination of MS275 with adriamycin resulted in a more pronounced increase in the activation of the TRAIL promoter as compared to cells treated with MS275 alone. 4C, either MS275 or adriamycin treatment resulted in a modest increase in Sp1 transcription activity as compared to untreated cells. IFN-γ also acts as a mediator to induce TRAIL in response to retinoid treatment (20). Interestingly, we did not detect the changes in the levels of Sp1 protein in response to the treatments (Fig. 6C shows that cells transfected with Sp1 siRNA are more resistant to MS275, adriamycin or in combination, as compared to cells transfected with control siRNA, which is similar to the results obtained with cells in which TRAIL was down regulated (Fig. 6A), the results obtained with an siRNA approach may not completely reflect the role of Sp1 in chemosensitivity. 6A), the results obtained with an siRNA approach may not completely reflect the role of Sp1 in chemosensitivity. 6A), the results obtained with an siRNA approach may not completely reflect the role of Sp1 in chemosensitivity. 6A), the results obtained with an siRNA approach may not completely reflect the role of Sp1 in chemosensitivity. To overcome this difficulty, we examined the role of Sp1 in chemosensitivity using Sp1 knockout mouse ES cells. The histone-deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) are novel anticancer agents that can activate transcription of target genes via histone acetylation (24). We also show that the underlying mechanism of such sensitization is mediated by the transcription factor Sp1 because Sp1 knockdown or deletion abolishes TRAIL induction and subsequently renders cells resistant to MS275, adriamycin or their combination. Sp1 was the first mammalian transcription factor to be identified (35). Sp1 was the first mammalian transcription factor to be identified (35). Sp1 was the first mammalian transcription factor to be identified (35). For example, Sp1 is over expressed in both gastric and pancreatic cancers, and overexpression of Sp1 enhances the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which promotes cancer angiogenesis (37, 38). For example, Sp1 is over expressed in both gastric and pancreatic cancers, and overexpression of Sp1 enhances the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which promotes cancer angiogenesis (37, 38). For example, Sp1 is over expressed in both gastric and pancreatic cancers, and overexpression of Sp1 enhances the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which promotes cancer angiogenesis (37, 38). For example, Sp1 is over expressed in both gastric and pancreatic cancers, and overexpression of Sp1 enhances the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which promotes cancer angiogenesis (37, 38). For example, Sp1 is over expressed in both gastric and pancreatic cancers, and overexpression of Sp1 enhances the expression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which promotes cancer angiogenesis (37, 38). It has been shown that protein modifications including phosphorylation by anticancer agents increase Sp1 transcription activity (40). In addition, it has been shown that HDAC1 could interact with Sp1 to regulate its activity (42). Since there are several HDAC family members, it is possible that MS275 could affect other HDAC members to regulate Sp1 activity. In addition to the use of TRAIL and agonistic antibodies alone or in combination with clinical chemotherapeutic agents, several new compounds including HDACIs that target the apoptotic pathway are under development (26, 27). In addition to the use of TRAIL and agonistic antibodies alone or in combination with clinical chemotherapeutic agents, several new compounds including HDACIs that target the apoptotic pathway are under development (26, 27). In addition to the use of TRAIL and agonistic antibodies alone or in combination with clinical chemotherapeutic agents, several new compounds including HDACIs that target the apoptotic pathway are under development (26, 27). In addition to the use of TRAIL and agonistic antibodies alone or in combination with clinical chemotherapeutic agents, several new compounds including HDACIs that target the apoptotic pathway are under development (26, 27). More importantly, we demonstrate that Sp1-dependent TRAIL induction plays a critical role in cell death induced by combined treatments with MS275 and adriamycin because down-regulation of TRAIL by siRNA in T47D or deletion of Sp1 in Sp1 knockout mouse ES cells abolishes such sensitization. Monoclonal anti-human TRAIL, DR4, and polyclonal DR5 antibodies were purchased from Imgenex (San Diego, CA). Rabbit anti-caspase-9, -8, -3, and anti-poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) polyclonal antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Beverly, MA). Monoclonal p21 antibody was purchased from Calbiochem (San Diego, CA). Anti-actin antibody was purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). Sp1 antibody was purchased from Upstate Biotechnology (Lake Placid, NY). The human breast cancer MDA231 and T47D cells were obtained from ATCC (Manassas, VA) and maintained in DMEM. The human breast cancer MDA231 and T47D cells were obtained from ATCC (Manassas, VA) and maintained in DMEM. The human breast cancer MDA231 and T47D cells were obtained from ATCC (Manassas, VA) and maintained in DMEM. The human breast cancer MDA231 and T47D cells were obtained from ATCC (Manassas, VA) and maintained in DMEM. The human breast cancer MDA231 and T47D cells were obtained from ATCC (Manassas, VA) and maintained in DMEM. The human breast cancer MDA231 and T47D cells were obtained from ATCC (Manassas, VA) and maintained in DMEM. Isolation of RNA and Northern blot analysisThe procedures for preparation of total RNA and Northern blot analysis were described previously (31). The transfection was performed as suggested by Dharmacon with slight modifications, as described previously (32). The transfection was performed as suggested by Dharmacon with slight modifications, as described previously (32). MTT assaysMTT assays were described previously (33). MTT assaysMTT assays were described previously (33). Cells were left untreated or treated with MS275, adriamycin, or in combination for 48 hr and then lysed in lysis buffer for 10 min on ice. Cells were left untreated or treated with MS275, adriamycin, or in combination for 48 hr and then lysed in lysis buffer for 10 min on ice. Construction of reporter vectorsTRAIL reporter constructs pGL3-TRAIL2, pGL3-TRAIL5 and pGL3-TRAIL6 were described previously (33) and shown in Fig. Thus, both TRAIL-R3 and TRAIL-R4 act as decoy receptors to antagonize TRAIL-induced apoptosis by competing for ligand binding (14, 15). Luciferase reporter assaysTransfections for luciferase assays were carried out as described previously (33). Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP)ChIP was performed using the ChIP Assay Kit (Upstate Biotechnology) as described previously (33). Binding of TRAIL to DR4 or DR5 triggers formation of the death-inducing signaling complex (DISC) by recruiting FADD and caspase-8 or -10, resulting in the activation of caspase-8 or -10, which in turn activates caspase-3, -6 and -7 to cleave death substrates and cause cell death. Binding of TRAIL to DR4 or DR5 triggers formation of the death-inducing signaling complex (DISC) by recruiting FADD and caspase-8 or -10, resulting in the activation of caspase-8 or -10, which in turn activates caspase-3, -6 and -7 to cleave death substrates and cause cell death. The PCR primers used in ChIP were 5′-AATGGGCTTGAGGTGAGTGCAGAT-3′ and 5′-ATGAGTTGTTTTTCTGGGTTCTGT-3′. Nuclear protein was then quantified using the Bio-Rad Protein Assay kit (Bio-Rad). The data were presented as the mean ± SD, and p≤ 0.05 was considered significant. HDACIs induce TRAIL expression in human breast cancer cellsThe regulation of TRAIL by cancer chemotherapy in solid tumor cell lines is not fully understood. 