Neuronavigation was developed successfully in human clinical neurosurgery and became a routine equipment in hospital operating rooms (Enchev, 2009). Neuronavigation was developed successfully in human clinical neurosurgery and became a routine equipment in hospital operating rooms (Enchev, 2009). Although X-radiography is often more readily available than MRI, the lack of three-dimensional imaging makes traditional X-rays less useful in applied neuroscience. Although most clinical MRI machines are set up with preloaded angiography sequences for human, many of these sequences are not ideal for smaller brains (monkey brains are about 25–30% in size relative to human brains). Although most clinical MRI machines are set up with preloaded angiography sequences for human, many of these sequences are not ideal for smaller brains (monkey brains are about 25–30% in size relative to human brains). Although most clinical MRI machines are set up with preloaded angiography sequences for human, many of these sequences are not ideal for smaller brains (monkey brains are about 25–30% in size relative to human brains). Ultra-high field MRI, and the eventual addition of contrast agents, could enhance the visualization of deep seated nuclei of basal ganglia in macaques as an example (Tani et al , 2011). Ultra-high field MRI, and the eventual addition of contrast agents, could enhance the visualization of deep seated nuclei of basal ganglia in macaques as an example (Tani et al , 2011). In addition, having the bone cement in direct contact with the skull can lead to the creation of porous bone, and since the bone cement is adhering to screws holding the implant in place, this can jeopardize the stability of the implant. In addition, having the bone cement in direct contact with the skull can lead to the creation of porous bone, and since the bone cement is adhering to screws holding the implant in place, this can jeopardize the stability of the implant. In addition, having the bone cement in direct contact with the skull can lead to the creation of porous bone, and since the bone cement is adhering to screws holding the implant in place, this can jeopardize the stability of the implant. In addition, having the bone cement in direct contact with the skull can lead to the creation of porous bone, and since the bone cement is adhering to screws holding the implant in place, this can jeopardize the stability of the implant. For neuroimaging researchers, especially those who would want to minimize signal artifact by using PEEK, hydroxyapatite is a good addition. Thus, the adherence characteristics of an implant in long bones may differ significantly from implants that are always located externally on a thin NHP skull. SolidWorks, USA) can be performed to ensure structural stability of the custom shapes before they are manufactured (Fig. These CAD files can then be sent to a high-resolution 3D printer or accurately manufactured using 5-axis CNC machines with high quality plastic materials (Fig. In addition, since closely marked multiple micro-lesions are difficult to identify, the number of detectable recording sites within a local volume is limited. Based on the location of the grid holes, it is possible to determine which grid holes correspond to the target recording area. Multiple factors potentially cause small deviations of the penetration angle, including electrode holding by the microdrive, small slipping during penetration of dura mater, or slight curvature of electrode during the penetration. When the targeting error is less than 1 mm, it does not matter in most cases for determining recording regions, such as whether recording from primary or secondary visual cortices. Ultrasonography can visualize the tissue with the inserted electrode in real-time, and monitor when the probe is inserted and how surrounding tissue is deformed and moved back to the original position. The scanning time is just a few seconds (X-ray) to a minute (CT), which is a great advantage for daily use. The scanning time is just a few seconds (X-ray) to a minute (CT), which is a great advantage for daily use. The scanning time is just a few seconds (X-ray) to a minute (CT), which is a great advantage for daily use. The scanning time is just a few seconds (X-ray) to a minute (CT), which is a great advantage for daily use. This susceptibility difference causes geometrical distortion and signal loss due to intravoxel phase dispersion (the so-called T2* effect), resulting in the shadow of the electrode. This method first creates a small metal deposit during the penetration by passing electrolytic current from the tip of the metal electrode. the white matter fiber tracts between cortical regions and subcortical structures. the white matter fiber tracts between cortical regions and subcortical structures. the white matter fiber tracts between cortical regions and subcortical structures. the white matter fiber tracts between cortical regions and subcortical structures. the white matter fiber tracts between cortical regions and subcortical structures. Diffusion MRI utilizes the fact that the diffusivity of water molecules is stronger following the direction of fiber passages than other directions (e.g. Diffusion MRI utilizes the fact that the diffusivity of water molecules is stronger following the direction of fiber passages than other directions (e.g. Diffusion MRI utilizes the fact that the diffusivity of water molecules is stronger following the direction of fiber passages than other directions (e.g. Diffusion MRI utilizes the fact that the diffusivity of water molecules is stronger following the direction of fiber passages than other directions (e.g. Diffusion MRI utilizes the fact that the diffusivity of water molecules is stronger following the direction of fiber passages than other directions (e.g. Diffusion MRI utilizes the fact that the diffusivity of water molecules is stronger following the direction of fiber passages than other directions (e.g. Diffusion MRI utilizes the fact that the diffusivity of water molecules is stronger following the direction of fiber passages than other directions (e.g. These parameters have limited the success of dMRI in human applications. These parameters have limited the success of dMRI in human applications. These parameters have limited the success of dMRI in human applications. Brain stimulation is achieved by using sensory, motor, or cognitive tasks that cause regional increases in neural activity. For important reviews, see (Alkemade et al , 2015; Duong, 2010; Janssen et al , 2018; Logothetis, 2003a; Nakahara et al , 2007; Orban, 2016; Orban et al , 2004; Seidlitz et al , 2018; Silva, 2017; Tootell et al , 2003; Tsao, 2014; Tsao and Livingstone, 2008). CT scanning is fast, with datasets acquired on the order of seconds, which is highly advantageous in many settings, such as a compromised patient. These studies have revealed that specialized cognitive and sensory networks retain their basic functional connectivity, even when not specifically engaged in task-relevant operations. These studies have revealed that specialized cognitive and sensory networks retain their basic functional connectivity, even when not specifically engaged in task-relevant operations. These studies have revealed that specialized cognitive and sensory networks retain their basic functional connectivity, even when not specifically engaged in task-relevant operations. These studies have revealed that specialized cognitive and sensory networks retain their basic functional connectivity, even when not specifically engaged in task-relevant operations. These studies have revealed that specialized cognitive and sensory networks retain their basic functional connectivity, even when not specifically engaged in task-relevant operations. For example, visual field locations that correspond in eccentricity correlate stronger than non-corresponding locations (Arcaro et al , 2015a), indicating that the visual field map structure is preserved regardless of perceptual state. For example, visual field locations that correspond in eccentricity correlate stronger than non-corresponding locations (Arcaro et al , 2015a), indicating that the visual field map structure is preserved regardless of perceptual state. In what follows, we first discuss the influence and impact of anesthesia on imaging modalities as well as provide example protocols that are used in our facilities. The stimuli-evoked BOLD response decreases with hypercapnia Sicard and Duong (2005). For NHPs with intact autoregulation and without any brain lesion, as for humans (Drummond, 2019), it likely takes a significant change in mean arterial pressure before any changes in CBF are observed, which consequently affect the BOLD signal. For NHPs with intact autoregulation and without any brain lesion, as for humans (Drummond, 2019), it likely takes a significant change in mean arterial pressure before any changes in CBF are observed, which consequently affect the BOLD signal. For NHPs with intact autoregulation and without any brain lesion, as for humans (Drummond, 2019), it likely takes a significant change in mean arterial pressure before any changes in CBF are observed, which consequently affect the BOLD signal. For NHPs with intact autoregulation and without any brain lesion, as for humans (Drummond, 2019), it likely takes a significant change in mean arterial pressure before any changes in CBF are observed, which consequently affect the BOLD signal. For NHPs with intact autoregulation and without any brain lesion, as for humans (Drummond, 2019), it likely takes a significant change in mean arterial pressure before any changes in CBF are observed, which consequently affect the BOLD signal. Thus, it is of high importance to keep body temperature stable during fMRI studies and avoiding hypothermia that occurs rapidly under sedation. Thus, structures are based on density relative to soft tissue: isodense (gray), hyperdense (white) and hypodense (black). Thus, structures are based on density relative to soft tissue: isodense (gray), hyperdense (white) and hypodense (black). Thus, structures are based on density relative to soft tissue: isodense (gray), hyperdense (white) and hypodense (black). However, while both anesthetics are safe to use in repetitive studies in the same animal, they suppress neuronal activity and decrease functional brain connectivity (Ranft et al , 2016; Standage et al , 2020; Wu et al , 2016) in a dose-dependent manner (Hutchison et al , 2014; Li et al , 2013; Lv et al , 2016). The TCI infusion system constantly adjusts the infusion rate to maintain the targeted plasma concentration of propofol. The TCI infusion system constantly adjusts the infusion rate to maintain the targeted plasma concentration of propofol. Much work has been done to compare functional data obtained in awake versus anesthetized conditions (Barttfeld et al , 2015; Krzeminski et al , 2017; Liu et al , 2013; Liu et al , 2015a; Uhrig et al , 2016; Uhrig et al , 2018). The spatial distribution of the effects of anesthetics in the brain is not uniform, as some regions, such as the precuneus, posterior cingulate gyrus, prefrontal dorsolateral cortex and thalamus are more deactivated than other regions of the brain (Franks, 2008). The spatial distribution of the effects of anesthetics in the brain is not uniform, as some regions, such as the precuneus, posterior cingulate gyrus, prefrontal dorsolateral cortex and thalamus are more deactivated than other regions of the brain (Franks, 2008). These results indicate that the ability to represent and predict the structure of auditory sequences is shared by humans (Bekinschtein et al , 2009) and NHPs (Uhrig et al , 2014b) and that the processing of high-order deviants activates in the macaque brain a fronto-parieto-cingular and thalamic network, similar and potentially homologous to the human Global Neuronal Workspace. 10) (Uhrig et al , 2016). 10) (Uhrig et al , 2016). 10) (Uhrig et al , 2016). In humans, the MMN is abolished during propofol-induced unconsciousness (Heinke et al , 2004). In humans, the MMN is abolished during propofol-induced unconsciousness (Heinke et al , 2004). In humans, the MMN is abolished during propofol-induced unconsciousness (Heinke et al , 2004). In humans, the MMN is abolished during propofol-induced unconsciousness (Heinke et al , 2004). Under increasing levels of propofol (ranging from moderate sedation to general anesthesia), a progressive disorganization of the global effect in the prefrontal, parietal and cingulate cortex is observed with a complete suppression under ketamine anesthesia. Thus, anesthetic agents disturb both short-term and long-term auditory predictive coding mechanisms in the macaque brain. Thus, anesthetic agents disturb both short-term and long-term auditory predictive coding mechanisms in the macaque brain. Thus, anesthetic agents disturb both short-term and long-term auditory predictive coding mechanisms in the macaque brain. Thus, anesthetic agents disturb both short-term and long-term auditory predictive coding mechanisms in the macaque brain. The training starts with acclimating the animals to body restraint for increasingly long periods of time, followed by acclimatization of the animal to the typical sounds of the different MRI and fMRI pulse sequences, and finally introducing a rigid head restraint device in the last phase of the training (Silva et al , 2011). The training starts with acclimating the animals to body restraint for increasingly long periods of time, followed by acclimatization of the animal to the typical sounds of the different MRI and fMRI pulse sequences, and finally introducing a rigid head restraint device in the last phase of the training (Silva et al , 2011). The training starts with acclimating the animals to body restraint for increasingly long periods of time, followed by acclimatization of the animal to the typical sounds of the different MRI and fMRI pulse sequences, and finally introducing a rigid head restraint device in the last phase of the training (Silva et al , 2011). The training starts with acclimating the animals to body restraint for increasingly long periods of time, followed by acclimatization of the animal to the typical sounds of the different MRI and fMRI pulse sequences, and finally introducing a rigid head restraint device in the last phase of the training (Silva et al , 2011). The training starts with acclimating the animals to body restraint for increasingly long periods of time, followed by acclimatization of the animal to the typical sounds of the different MRI and fMRI pulse sequences, and finally introducing a rigid head restraint device in the last phase of the training (Silva et al , 2011). The training starts with acclimating the animals to body restraint for increasingly long periods of time, followed by acclimatization of the animal to the typical sounds of the different MRI and fMRI pulse sequences, and finally introducing a rigid head restraint device in the last phase of the training (Silva et al , 2011). The training starts with acclimating the animals to body restraint for increasingly long periods of time, followed by acclimatization of the animal to the typical sounds of the different MRI and fMRI pulse sequences, and finally introducing a rigid head restraint device in the last phase of the training (Silva et al , 2011). This invasion can proceed along a portion of the implant edge, or is sometimes be confined to a single point, such as a physical opening between the implant and the bone, or the area around an insufficiently sealed screw.On T1 MRI, tissue growth, primarily granulation tissue, or liquid can be identified as light gray or white (i.e. On T2 images the liquid and tissue growth would appear bright. 14 also shows an example of communication between the extracranial (green arrow) and intracranial (red arrow) space, in this case through a hole in the skull associated with a screw. Careful application and curing of acrylic or dental cement, to generate a smooth texture and a solid monolithic implant that precisely meets the bone-skin interface, minimizes the formation of granulation tissue. This should be the goal of every approach to placement of any type of cranial implant, as minimizing granulation tissue formation will prolong the health of the implant, and of course, positively affect the health of the implanted NHP.Each of the bright areas highlighted in Fig. 99mTc-hexamethylpropylene amine oxime (99mTc-HMPAO) is one such radiopharmaceutical that is commonly used for labeling neutrophils to localize inflammation and in fection in human medicine. 99mTc-hexamethylpropylene amine oxime (99mTc-HMPAO) is one such radiopharmaceutical that is commonly used for labeling neutrophils to localize inflammation and in fection in human medicine. 99mTc-hexamethylpropylene amine oxime (99mTc-HMPAO) is one such radiopharmaceutical that is commonly used for labeling neutrophils to localize inflammation and in fection in human medicine. This feature is useful for evaluating neutrophil-mediated processes of inflammation, such as bacterial infections that are commonly associated with cranial implants in NHPs. Rather, radiopharmaceuticals that have a longer half-life, such as 111Indium (half-life, 67 h) may be more appropriate for slower developing infections (Love and Palestro, 2004; Roddie et al , 1988). Rather, radiopharmaceuticals that have a longer half-life, such as 111Indium (half-life, 67 h) may be more appropriate for slower developing infections (Love and Palestro, 2004; Roddie et al , 1988). Rather, radiopharmaceuticals that have a longer half-life, such as 111Indium (half-life, 67 h) may be more appropriate for slower developing infections (Love and Palestro, 2004; Roddie et al , 1988). Rather, radiopharmaceuticals that have a longer half-life, such as 111Indium (half-life, 67 h) may be more appropriate for slower developing infections (Love and Palestro, 2004; Roddie et al , 1988). When caught early, even deep brain infections are treated with success. While this type of decline is clearly a positive development that can temporarily hold an infection at bay, antibiotics alone are often ineffective at permanently removing an infection if it has a considerable presence under an implant. In this case, treatment proved entirely ineffective, as a scan ten days later showed that the abscess had grown significantly in size. During this procedure, the fluid from the abscess was submitted for analysis and the appropriate antibiotics were administered. This is hydrocephalus and is likely to be congenital resulting from cerebral aqueductal stenosis, as is seen in humans. This is hydrocephalus and is likely to be congenital resulting from cerebral aqueductal stenosis, as is seen in humans. 3.1.Pre-scan assessment: anesthesiaThe use of MRI in neuroscientific research has revolutionized our ability to care for our research animals, especially NHP. Unless trained to present limbs for blood collection, even this routine clinical procedure requires anesthesia in NHP. Many facilities routinely use a ketamine, dexmedetomidine, and midazolam ‘cocktail’ for this procedure, as the sedative effects are easily and quickly reversible specifically with atipamezole and less specifically with yohimbine for the α2 agonists, and flumazenil for the benzodiazepines. Many facilities routinely use a ketamine, dexmedetomidine, and midazolam ‘cocktail’ for this procedure, as the sedative effects are easily and quickly reversible specifically with atipamezole and less specifically with yohimbine for the α2 agonists, and flumazenil for the benzodiazepines. Many facilities routinely use a ketamine, dexmedetomidine, and midazolam ‘cocktail’ for this procedure, as the sedative effects are easily and quickly reversible specifically with atipamezole and less specifically with yohimbine for the α2 agonists, and flumazenil for the benzodiazepines. Many facilities routinely use a ketamine, dexmedetomidine, and midazolam ‘cocktail’ for this procedure, as the sedative effects are easily and quickly reversible specifically with atipamezole and less specifically with yohimbine for the α2 agonists, and flumazenil for the benzodiazepines. Many facilities routinely use a ketamine, dexmedetomidine, and midazolam ‘cocktail’ for this procedure, as the sedative effects are easily and quickly reversible specifically with atipamezole and less specifically with yohimbine for the α2 agonists, and flumazenil for the benzodiazepines. Many facilities routinely use a ketamine, dexmedetomidine, and midazolam ‘cocktail’ for this procedure, as the sedative effects are easily and quickly reversible specifically with atipamezole and less specifically with yohimbine for the α2 agonists, and flumazenil for the benzodiazepines. In the awake animal, cardiovascular and respiratory systems assessment include, respiratory rate and effort, whether normal, increased, or labored, any audible respiratory sounds such as wheezing, stertor, stridor, coughing, and color of visible mucosae to assess perfusion. Physiological parameters should be monitored until the beginning of the anesthesia. Once the animal is deemed stable or within normal limits, the animal can be transported to the MRI suite in accordance with facility policies. Once the animal is deemed stable or within normal limits, the animal can be transported to the MRI suite in accordance with facility policies. Once the animal is deemed stable or within normal limits, the animal can be transported to the MRI suite in accordance with facility policies. Once the animal is deemed stable or within normal limits, the animal can be transported to the MRI suite in accordance with facility policies. Once the animal is deemed stable or within normal limits, the animal can be transported to the MRI suite in accordance with facility policies. (Uhrig et al , 2016). A saline drip is often placed, to provide for hydration, and allows for immediate IV access should the animal develop critical needs. A saline drip is often placed, to provide for hydration, and allows for immediate IV access should the animal develop critical needs. Routine monitoring of vital signs is critical. It is advisable that the muscle blocking agent be reversed before recovery from anesthesia. It is advisable that the muscle blocking agent be reversed before recovery from anesthesia. It is advisable that the muscle blocking agent be reversed before recovery from anesthesia. Subdural blood is also extra-axial and crosses suture lines and is typically crescentic in shape. If the patient is obtunded or somnolent, they are managed with special attention to dose and anesthetic agent, intubated, mechanically ventilated and moved to surgery or imaging. If the patient is obtunded or somnolent, they are managed with special attention to dose and anesthetic agent, intubated, mechanically ventilated and moved to surgery or imaging. Obtunded patients do not necessarily have any other issues, so monitoring their blood pressure, heart rate, SpO2, EtCO2, and managing those while the surgeon or MRI technician is performing their procedures, is the critical focus of the anesthetist. Obtunded patients do not necessarily have any other issues, so monitoring their blood pressure, heart rate, SpO2, EtCO2, and managing those while the surgeon or MRI technician is performing their procedures, is the critical focus of the anesthetist. Including injectable and inhalant anesthetics will provide a balanced, hemodynamically stable patient. Including injectable and inhalant anesthetics will provide a balanced, hemodynamically stable patient. In dogs, the decrease in cerebral blood flow is not accompanied by a decrease in cerebral metabolic rate, therefore placing the animals at risk of cerebral ischemia. In dogs, the decrease in cerebral blood flow is not accompanied by a decrease in cerebral metabolic rate, therefore placing the animals at risk of cerebral ischemia. In dogs, the decrease in cerebral blood flow is not accompanied by a decrease in cerebral metabolic rate, therefore placing the animals at risk of cerebral ischemia. Studies are inconclusive thus far, and this requires further research. Studies are inconclusive thus far, and this requires further research. For up to date information see: https://www.uptodate.com/contents/anesthesia-for-craniotomy?sectionName=Anesthesia%20induction%20agents&topicRef=94283&anchor=H78577820&source=see_link#H78577820.During neurosurgical procedures, it is advisable to maintain normocapnia during mechanical ventilation. For up to date information see: https://www.uptodate.com/contents/anesthesia-for-craniotomy?sectionName=Anesthesia%20induction%20agents&topicRef=94283&anchor=H78577820&source=see_link#H78577820.During neurosurgical procedures, it is advisable to maintain normocapnia during mechanical ventilation. For up to date information see: https://www.uptodate.com/contents/anesthesia-for-craniotomy?sectionName=Anesthesia%20induction%20agents&topicRef=94283&anchor=H78577820&source=see_link#H78577820.During neurosurgical procedures, it is advisable to maintain normocapnia during mechanical ventilation. It is necessary to keep in mind that prolonged hypocapnia leads to cerebral vasoconstriction, which can lead to cerebral ischemia, especially if there is an underlying brain lesion. It is necessary to keep in mind that prolonged hypocapnia leads to cerebral vasoconstriction, which can lead to cerebral ischemia, especially if there is an underlying brain lesion. When working with models that involved neurotoxicity, either as a purpose of the research or as a complication, cerebral edema is very likely to occur. When working with models that involved neurotoxicity, either as a purpose of the research or as a complication, cerebral edema is very likely to occur. Hypocapnia has also been shown to be useful in anesthesia of patients with large intracranial abscesses.If the researcher has the capability of performing imaging early (both baseline and early in the course of illness, post-operative conditions, and so on), as well as doing them frequently for all implanted animals, then hypocapnia is not required for every anesthetic period. To detect neurological problems, behavioral assessment is a powerful approach to complement regular MRI scans. Indeed, problems can occur between scheduled scans and daily behavioral checks can help determining when advancing the next MRI scan could be useful. Indeed, problems can occur between scheduled scans and daily behavioral checks can help determining when advancing the next MRI scan could be useful. Indeed, problems can occur between scheduled scans and daily behavioral checks can help determining when advancing the next MRI scan could be useful. Indeed, problems can occur between scheduled scans and daily behavioral checks can help determining when advancing the next MRI scan could be useful. Indeed, problems can occur between scheduled scans and daily behavioral checks can help determining when advancing the next MRI scan could be useful. Indeed, problems can occur between scheduled scans and daily behavioral checks can help determining when advancing the next MRI scan could be useful. Indeed, problems can occur between scheduled scans and daily behavioral checks can help determining when advancing the next MRI scan could be useful. A rigid posture, particularly with the head extended dorsally, head pressing, either against the cage or with the hands against the head; sensitivity to light (not photophobia, which is more severe); reluctance to move; lack of appetite; lack of interest in surroundings or lack of responsiveness other than to more intense stimuli can be signs of neurological problems. Routine visits to the cage side with positive reinforcement, increases familiarity and thus decreases the likelihood of behavioral changes upon observation, thus leading to earlier and more accurate diagnoses (Raber et al , 2018). Routine visits to the cage side with positive reinforcement, increases familiarity and thus decreases the likelihood of behavioral changes upon observation, thus leading to earlier and more accurate diagnoses (Raber et al , 2018). Routine visits to the cage side with positive reinforcement, increases familiarity and thus decreases the likelihood of behavioral changes upon observation, thus leading to earlier and more accurate diagnoses (Raber et al , 2018). A way to minimize behavioral changes with observation is to use remote monitoring (Gaither et al , 2014). A way to minimize behavioral changes with observation is to use remote monitoring (Gaither et al , 2014). A way to minimize behavioral changes with observation is to use remote monitoring (Gaither et al , 2014). A way to minimize behavioral changes with observation is to use remote monitoring (Gaither et al , 2014). A way to minimize behavioral changes with observation is to use remote monitoring (Gaither et al , 2014). Changes in behavior frequency are also usually too subtle to be detected via routine daily checks and might require behaviors to be systematically and precisely quantified. Based on current knowledge, this measure is thus not suitable for comparing well-being between individuals. Based on current knowledge, this measure is thus not suitable for comparing well-being between individuals. Thus, iodinated contrast agents improve vascular visualization and can also be used to illustrate areas of blood-brain barrier breakdown. Thus, iodinated contrast agents improve vascular visualization and can also be used to illustrate areas of blood-brain barrier breakdown. Thus, iodinated contrast agents improve vascular visualization and can also be used to illustrate areas of blood-brain barrier breakdown. Two measures are currently possible: the total volume of hippocampus and the local amount of gray matter in the anterior hippocampus. Both the neurological impact of multiple anesthetic events, and its possible impacts on psychological well-being of NHPs, require further investigation and needs to be considered. With the increase in the availability of imaging tools and procedures in research facilities, particularly MRI, we are now well-poised to make significant advances in improving the well-being, clinical care and experimental outcomes of laboratory NHPs. Attention to imaging modality as well as whether or not anesthesia is used and how, will further improve experimental and clinical outcomes. Our effort here is to provide information to scientists and veterinarians interested in taking advantage of modern imaging approaches at their facilities and to foster further discussions and interactions between scientists and veterinarians aimed at improving laboratory NHP well-being and health and experimental outcomes. Gadolinium alters the T1 properties of tissue, resulting in “T1-shortening” which is typically demonstrated as increased signal intensity in any location where gadolinium accumulates. Gadolinium alters the T1 properties of tissue, resulting in “T1-shortening” which is typically demonstrated as increased signal intensity in any location where gadolinium accumulates. For example, infections and tumors potentially have many common imaging features. Imaging is used to refine experimental methods and techniques. This can occur within abscesses but is rarely evident in tumors. Ventriculoradiography is another traditional method used to provide anatomical information. Ventriculoradiography is another traditional method used to provide anatomical information. 