The C-terminal extension of Lsm4 interacts directly with the 3′ end of the histone mRNP and this interaction is required for efficient histone mRNA degradation [13]. ZCCHC11 is the terminal uridylyl transferase responsible for human histone mRNA uridylation following inhibition or completion of DNA replication [14] (Table 1 and Figure 1). Eri1, as an exonuclease, acts on oligouridylated histone mRNAs and trims histone mRNA 3′ ends into the stem-loop [15]. Eri1, as an exonuclease, acts on oligouridylated histone mRNAs and trims histone mRNA 3′ ends into the stem-loop [15]. Eri1, as an exonuclease, acts on oligouridylated histone mRNAs and trims histone mRNA 3′ ends into the stem-loop [15]. Multiple oligouridylation events may be required for 3′–5′ degradation of histone mRNAs on polyribosomes [16]. Relatively more recently, studies reveal that nontemplated 3′ nucleotide addition to eukaryotic RNAs is a more widespread phenomenon. In addition to promoting decapping, the nontemplated oligo(U) tail prevents 3′–5′ exonucleolytic decay to ensure 5′–3′ directional degradation [25]. U6-TUTase is a terminal uridylyl transferase that posttranscriptionally 3′ oligouridylates U6 snRNA [29,30], whereas USB1 is a distributive 3′–5′ exoribonuclease that posttranscriptionally removes uridine and adenosine nucleotides from the 3′ end of U6 snRNA [31]. In hen1 mutants, both miRNAs and siRNAs undergo 3′ truncation and 3′ uridylation, leading to their decline in abundance [35]. In humans, Zcchc11 (TUT4) uridylates the cytokine-targeting miRNA miR-26b; the uridylation appears to attenuate the target repression activity of this miRNA such that Zcchc11 promotes the expression of cytokine genes [49] (Table 1 and Figure 1). Zcchc6 (TUT7) and Zcchc11 (TUT4) uridylate a small set of miRNAs with a common sequence motif [48] (Table 1 and Figure 1). This indicates that small RNA regulatory pathways may have built-in feedback regulation. This indicates that small RNA regulatory pathways may have built-in feedback regulation. This indicates that small RNA regulatory pathways may have built-in feedback regulation. This indicates that small RNA regulatory pathways may have built-in feedback regulation. In Drosophila, the introduction of artificial RNAs with a high degree of sequence complementarity to miRNAs leads to the 3′ trimming and 3′ tailing of the cognate miRNAs [57]. In Drosophila, the introduction of artificial RNAs with a high degree of sequence complementarity to miRNAs leads to the 3′ trimming and 3′ tailing of the cognate miRNAs [57]. The related nucleotidyl transferase TUT7 acts redundantly with TUT4 in this process–simultaneous knockdown of TUT7 and TUT4 leads to increased let-7 levels in embryonic stem cells [63]. Degradation of oligouridylated pre-let-7 requires the 3′–5′ exonuclease Dis3L2, which prefers U-ending RNAs as substrates [65–68].However, in differentiated cells, pre-let-7 uridylation has a different outcome. Degradation of oligouridylated pre-let-7 requires the 3′–5′ exonuclease Dis3L2, which prefers U-ending RNAs as substrates [65–68].However, in differentiated cells, pre-let-7 uridylation has a different outcome. Degradation of oligouridylated pre-let-7 requires the 3′–5′ exonuclease Dis3L2, which prefers U-ending RNAs as substrates [65–68].However, in differentiated cells, pre-let-7 uridylation has a different outcome. Degradation of oligouridylated pre-let-7 requires the 3′–5′ exonuclease Dis3L2, which prefers U-ending RNAs as substrates [65–68].However, in differentiated cells, pre-let-7 uridylation has a different outcome. In mouse P19 teratocarcinoma cells, which stop expressing Lin28 upon in vitro differentiation, profiling of pre-miRNAs revealed Lin28-dependent pre-let-7 oligouridylation and Lin28-independent pre-let-7 monouridylation [59]. In human somatic cells, Lin28 is not expressed and the nucleotidyl transferases TUT7, TUT4, and TUT2 monouridylate pre-let-7; this converts pre-let-7 with a 1 nt 3′ overhang to a better Dicer substrate with a 2 nt 3′ overhang and thus enhances dicer processing [69] (Table 1 and Figure 1).Related to the function of triggering degradation, pre-miRNA uridylation also plays a role in pre-miRNA quality control. High throughput sequencing revealed that mirtron pre-miRNAs, which are generated from intron splicing rather than Drosha processing, are preferentially uridylated as compared to canonical pre-miRNAs [70,71]. 2 3′ Adenylation affects RNA synthesis and degradation In human THP-1 cells, 3′ adenylation of miR-21 is caused by the non-canonical poly(A) polymerase PAPD5 rather than GLD-2. 2.2 Adenylation of mRNAIn eukaryotic cells, the cotranscriptional addition of a poly(A) tail to the 3′ ends of mRNA molecules is nearly universal; the poly(A) tail protects mRNAs from degradation and facilitates their translation from yeast to higher eukaryotes [1]. Pre-mRNA degradation may represent a secondary role for RNA adenylation in mammals. 5-fluorouracil (5FU), a chemotherapeutic compound for the treatment of solid tumors, was found to inhibit this exosome-dependent surveillance pathway that degrades polyadenylated precursor rRNAs [87]. 5-fluorouracil (5FU), a chemotherapeutic compound for the treatment of solid tumors, was found to inhibit this exosome-dependent surveillance pathway that degrades polyadenylated precursor rRNAs [87]. Following the oligouridylation event, the heteroheptameric Lsm1–7 complex binds to the oligo(U) tail to trigger subsequent histone mRNA degradation via both 5′–3′ and 3′–5′ RNA decay pathways [10,12]. miRNA 3′ tailing appears to undergo developmental regulation. Uridylation and/or adenylation are universal and conserved RNA modifications that have major impacts on the degradation, synthesis and mode of action of RNAs. 