The values ranged from 0.46 to 5.98 8-oxo-dG/106 dG and >90% were within one SD of the mean and >97% were within two×SD. This method was based on enzyme digestion, HPLC clean up and capillary LC–MS/MS. Several rounds of comparisons demonstrated significant differences of 8-oxo-dG background in DNA, which varied by several orders of magnitude [2,3]. While convenient, the recovery of 8-oxo-dG was reduced when samples remained on the fraction collector for a long period of time. While convenient, the recovery of 8-oxo-dG was reduced when samples remained on the fraction collector for a long period of time. To stabilize 8-oxo-dG during automated fraction collection, 300 μL of TEMPO (75 mM) were added to the collection tubes. In the previously published study [15], this step was performed manually, and the fraction was either immediately capped and stored at −80 °C or the solvents were removed in the SpeedVac.To determine whether TEMPO prevents further oxidation of 8-oxo-dG, 100 nM 8-oxo-dG in aqueous solution were incubated with 15 mM TEMPO for 24 h at room temperature. Samples were analyzed by UPLC–HESI–MS/MS monitoring for both dG and 8-oxo-dG. It was previously reported that 2′-deoxyadenosine forms solvent clusters which mimicked 8-oxo-dG during LC–MS/MS analysis [17]. Alternatively, sufficient separation of 8-oxo-dG from interfering peaks can be obtained by using a 5 μm particle capillary column that is operated at 10 °C [18].The main breakthrough towards a robust and reproducible method, however, was the availability of a heat assisted electrospray ionization source (HESI). More importantly, interfering peaks were essentially removed using HESI (Fig. FPG creates strand breaks at 8-oxo-dG sites that subsequently can be quantified via the single cell electrophoresis assay (comet assay) or alkaline elution techniques [10,11]. The treatment concentrations were based on a well-established model, which produces a characteristic biphasic dose response for H2O2 induced DNA lesions [19]. The treatment concentrations were based on a well-established model, which produces a characteristic biphasic dose response for H2O2 induced DNA lesions [19]. As expected, the formation of 8-oxo-dG followed the same biphasic dose response as previously reported for single strand breaks measured by the comet assay and formation of apurinic sites [19]. Establishment of 8-oxo-dG amounts in human peripheral blood lymphocyte DNAA previous criticism of 8-oxo-dG as a viable biomarker for oxidative stress was related to disagreements concerning endogenous background amounts. Establishment of 8-oxo-dG amounts in human peripheral blood lymphocyte DNAA previous criticism of 8-oxo-dG as a viable biomarker for oxidative stress was related to disagreements concerning endogenous background amounts. Establishment of 8-oxo-dG amounts in human peripheral blood lymphocyte DNAA previous criticism of 8-oxo-dG as a viable biomarker for oxidative stress was related to disagreements concerning endogenous background amounts. Establishment of 8-oxo-dG amounts in human peripheral blood lymphocyte DNAA previous criticism of 8-oxo-dG as a viable biomarker for oxidative stress was related to disagreements concerning endogenous background amounts. Together, these data provide confidence that the presented UPLC–HESI–MS/MS method measures 8-oxo-dG accurately and free of artifact. Further, to obtain sufficient sensitivity and to increase reproducibility, adduct enrichment is needed. The advantage of our procedure is that sample work up, including HPLC purification, can be automated and performed without utilizing expensive mass spectrometer time. Extraction of DNA from tissue typically requires 2 full workdays to process about 16 samples. Automated HPLC fraction collection can be performed overnight, and the fractions usually require 1 full day for evaporation. Second, sample enrichment by HPLC fraction collection, immunoaffinity chromatography [17,23] or online column switching [22] is essential to achieve sufficient sensitivity and to remove potential interferences. Fourth, the UPLC–HESI–MS/MS method has been successfully applied to show the biphasic dose response of 8-oxo-dG in H2O2-treated HeLa cells. Materials and methods Materials and methods Materials and methods Cell linesHeLa S3 cells were obtained in suspension from the Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Rat LiverWhole, snap frozen rat livers were purchased from Taconics (Germantown, NY). Collection of human peripheral blood lymphocytesDNA from human peripheral blood lymphocytes was collected as part of the Diet, Supplements, and Health (DISH) Study, a cross-sectional study that examined dietary antioxidants and oxidative stress in healthy African American and White adults in North Carolina. Eligible persons were 20–45 years of age, generally healthy, free of diseases related to oxidative stress (i.e., cancer, diabetes, heart disease, etc. Cell culture or peripheral blood lymphocyte pellets were dissolved in 2mL Lysis Solution®. Cell culture or peripheral blood lymphocyte pellets were dissolved in 2mL Lysis Solution®. Enzyme hydrolysisFor enzyme hydrolysis, DNA concentrations were determined by UV spectrometry, and concentrations were adjusted to approximately 1μg/μL. Enzyme hydrolysisFor enzyme hydrolysis, DNA concentrations were determined by UV spectrometry, and concentrations were adjusted to approximately 1μg/μL. Enzyme hydrolysisFor enzyme hydrolysis, DNA concentrations were determined by UV spectrometry, and concentrations were adjusted to approximately 1μg/μL. This was followed by the addition of 2.7 mU phosphodiesterase I and 2U alkaline phosphatase with continued incubation at 37 °C for 60 min. The final volume of sample containing all reagents and internal standard was 300 μL. The final volume of sample containing all reagents and internal standard was 300 μL. Enrichment of 8-oxo-dG by HPLCDNA filtrates were transferred to high-recovery, glass autosampler vials, and 8-oxo-dG was purified by reverse phase HPLC using an Ultrasphere ODS C18 4.6 mm×250 mm 5 μm column (Beckman, Fullerton, CA). The gradient program provided by an Agilent 1200 HPLC system (Agilent, Santa Clara, CA) was as follows: 7% methanol, 10 mM ammonium formate (pH 4.3) for 22 min, then increasing methanol linearly to 80% in 1 min and holding for 6 min. A 2.1 mm×100 mm HSS T3 C18, 1.8 μm column (Waters, Milford, MA) was operated with a linear gradient of 1% methanol and 0.1% acetic acid in water to 5% methanol in 2 min and then held for 10 min, followed by an increase to 50% methanol in 2 min, at a flow rate of 200 μl/min. The retention time of 8-oxo-dG was determined with authentic standards. The dose response of 8-oxo-dG, as determined by the UPLC–HESI–MS/MS method is shown in Fig. These data demonstrate the suitability of the UPLC–HESI–MS/MS method for analysis of 8-oxo-dG. These data demonstrate the suitability of the UPLC–HESI–MS/MS method for analysis of 8-oxo-dG. These data demonstrate the suitability of the UPLC–HESI–MS/MS method for analysis of 8-oxo-dG. These data demonstrate the suitability of the UPLC–HESI–MS/MS method for analysis of 8-oxo-dG. 