To account for noise, the average was taken over 20 or 17 ms. The inverse solutions were obtained for refined epicardial meshes and comparisons were carried out at a subset of the nodes corresponding to sock measurement locations (108 and 247 leads for Bordeaux and Utah data respectively). Electrogram Amplitude: Electrogram amplitude was measured as the mean of the peak-to-peak amplitudes from each lead. Electrogram Amplitude: Electrogram amplitude was measured as the mean of the peak-to-peak amplitudes from each lead. Electrogram Amplitude: Electrogram amplitude was measured as the mean of the peak-to-peak amplitudes from each lead. Electrogram Amplitude: Electrogram amplitude was measured as the mean of the peak-to-peak amplitudes from each lead. This error can come from the presence of noise in the body surface potentials not related to the underlying cardiac electrical activity (i.e. Activation maps were compared using the following metrics Activation maps were compared using the following metrics Activation maps were compared using the following metrics Activation maps were compared using the following metrics Activation maps were compared using the following metrics The LE was then computed as the Euclidian distance between the ECGI and recorded pacing sites. Data are expressed as mean ± SD unless otherwise stated. Data are expressed as mean ± SD unless otherwise stated. Figures contain representative data, with Tables containing the complete results available as an online supplement. The Notch filter significantly improved SNR-HF for Bordeaux 1 where lines noise was prominent. The Notch filter significantly improved SNR-HF for Bordeaux 1 where lines noise was prominent. The lambda value was significantly reduced in the majority of cases. Signal processing can be used to minimize the impact of noise in the ECG including filtering, baseline drift removal and/or signal averaging. Signal processing can be used to minimize the impact of noise in the ECG including filtering, baseline drift removal and/or signal averaging. Signal processing can be used to minimize the impact of noise in the ECG including filtering, baseline drift removal and/or signal averaging. Signal processing can be used to minimize the impact of noise in the ECG including filtering, baseline drift removal and/or signal averaging. Globally, SA showed similar SNR-HF and baseline shift values to many HFR + BDR combinations, though the SNR-HF was greater than any method for Bordeaux 1 data. Globally, SA showed similar SNR-HF and baseline shift values to many HFR + BDR combinations, though the SNR-HF was greater than any method for Bordeaux 1 data. Globally, SA showed similar SNR-HF and baseline shift values to many HFR + BDR combinations, though the SNR-HF was greater than any method for Bordeaux 1 data. Here, the ECGI electrograms using the moving average (HFR1) alone (yellow) are slightly smaller than those without filtering (blue) or using a notch filter (HFR3; orange) in the clean data.While certain HFR methods did significantly improve the correlation for both Bordeaux 1 and Utah 1 data compared to no filtering, the improvements were minimal (0.2–2.3% maximum). Variation between the activation maps on a beat-to-beat basis was also greater for the noisy Bordeaux 1 data as demonstrated by the larger standard deviation in correlation and MAE compared to the other data. However, in approximately a ¼ of the beats the activation map was changed drastically in the Noisy data, as seen in Fig. Other HFR methods also altered the activation sequences compared to no filtering (example Fig. On the other hand, for the other data sets there were no substantial visual differences between the HFR filtered and the unfiltered reconstructed activation maps other than shifts in the early activated region (Fig. The wavelet method (BDR2) was an exception to this, improving activation map accuracy in terms of correlation and MAE as it provided some HFR to electrograms. The wavelet method (BDR2) was an exception to this, improving activation map accuracy in terms of correlation and MAE as it provided some HFR to electrograms. Inspecting the electrograms in this region revealed an artefactual early downslope that is reconstructed only after BDR (as demonstrated in Fig. HFR does not impact electrogram reconstruction accuracy, but does impact post-processing to extract features such as activation times. The HFR methods and parameters will depend on the features one wishes to extract.BDR improves reconstructed electrogram due to a reduction in lambda value selected. The HFR methods and parameters will depend on the features one wishes to extract.BDR improves reconstructed electrogram due to a reduction in lambda value selected. The HFR methods and parameters will depend on the features one wishes to extract.BDR improves reconstructed electrogram due to a reduction in lambda value selected. We recommend using the simple method (BDR1) as this is sufficient to see these improvements.Signal averaging may be a useful processing tool but care should be taken in aligning the beats. We recommend using the simple method (BDR1) as this is sufficient to see these improvements.Signal averaging may be a useful processing tool but care should be taken in aligning the beats. We recommend using the simple method (BDR1) as this is sufficient to see these improvements.Signal averaging may be a useful processing tool but care should be taken in aligning the beats. A.High Frequency and Baseline Drift RemovalTorso signals with baseline drift present (i.e. A.High Frequency and Baseline Drift RemovalTorso signals with baseline drift present (i.e. The more baseline drift present, the more regularization the signals received. Even a low pass filter above the line noise improved activation reconstruction accuracy, indicating the line noise does not impact activation marker placement.The moving average (HFR2) and 30 Hz low pass (HFR6) filter methods were detrimental to defining activation times for the Utah 2 data set by over-smoothing the reconstructed electrogram (Fig. For example, the low pass filter of 30 Hz created an obvious ringing on either side of QRS in the Clean data set. For example, the low pass filter of 30 Hz created an obvious ringing on either side of QRS in the Clean data set. For example, the low pass filter of 30 Hz created an obvious ringing on either side of QRS in the Clean data set. For example, the low pass filter of 30 Hz created an obvious ringing on either side of QRS in the Clean data set. Here we have found signal averaging to be beneficial for the clean data and detrimental for the noisier Bordeaux 1 data set. Here we have found signal averaging to be beneficial for the clean data and detrimental for the noisier Bordeaux 1 data set. We hypothesize that if the optimal alignment approach can be determined, it would provide the best filtering tool to use for stable rhythms as there would be no QRS deformation. We hypothesize that if the optimal alignment approach can be determined, it would provide the best filtering tool to use for stable rhythms as there would be no QRS deformation. We hypothesize that if the optimal alignment approach can be determined, it would provide the best filtering tool to use for stable rhythms as there would be no QRS deformation. C.LimitationsThe results presented should be considered in light of limitations. Furthermore, the impact of different lambda values would change with different regularization methods, e.g. There was no change for activation maps.The study was conducted in an experimental setting, and it cannot fully represent the recording environment of a clinical setting. Despite this, we expect our results are directly transferable to the clinic. The question with these later cases is how to define the isoelectric point to ensure that the optimal lambda value is chosen. All experimental procedures were approved by the Directive 2010/63/EU of the European Parliament on the protection of animals used for scientific purposes and the local ethical committee.Excised pig hearts were perfused in Langendorff mode with 100% oxygenated Tyrode’s solution (pH 7.4, 37 °C). An epicardial electrode sock (108 electrodes with inter-electrode spacing 9.9 ± 2.2 mm) was attached to the ventricles and bipolar pacing leads to the RV apex. The hearts were transferred to a human-shaped torso tank with 128 electrodes (inter-electrode spacing 66 ± 24 mm) embedded in the surface (Fig. The isolated, perfused heart was suspended in a human torso shaped tank with 192 electrodes (with inter-electrode spacing 40.2 ± 16.8mm) and filled with an electrolytic solution (500 Ω-cm). The epicardial, intramural, and torso tank electrodes were referenced to a Wilson’s Central Terminal and were sampled at 1000 Hz simultaneously for five seconds during RV pacing. ECG SIGNAL PROCESSING METHODS ECG SIGNAL PROCESSING METHODS ECG SIGNAL PROCESSING METHODS The different filters used are outlined below. The different filters used are outlined below. The different filters used are outlined below. The different filters used are outlined below. The weight function is constant normalized by the number of samples in window.2)Pipberger’s Filter (HFR2):Also a moving average filter, suggested in [18], where the averaging window corresponds with the length of two cycles of 50 or 60 Hz (40 or 33 ms), and the summed samples are weighted by a cosine function.3)Notch Filter (HFR3):Signals were transformed into the Fourier space, and a notch filter was applied around the line frequency and its harmonics before applying the inverse Fourier transform.4)Savitzky-Golay Filter (HFR4):A Savitzky-Golay FIR smoothing filter was applied to the data using the ‘sgolayfilt’ function in MATLAB R2018a with an order of 3 and a frame length of 20 or 17 ms.5)Rational Transfer Function (HFR5):A rational transfer function (RTF) implemented using MATLAB, the default filter implemented in the open-source PFEIFER toolbox [19]. This filter serves as a weighted running average with an 11-element kernel size.6)Butterworth Low Pass Filters (HFR6 and HFR7):Two different IIR low pass filters with filter order 7 at cut-off frequencies, 30 Hz (HFR6) and 60 Hz (HFR7) to be below or at/above the line frequency noise present in each dataset [20]. This filter serves as a weighted running average with an 11-element kernel size.6)Butterworth Low Pass Filters (HFR6 and HFR7):Two different IIR low pass filters with filter order 7 at cut-off frequencies, 30 Hz (HFR6) and 60 Hz (HFR7) to be below or at/above the line frequency noise present in each dataset [20]. This filter serves as a weighted running average with an 11-element kernel size.6)Butterworth Low Pass Filters (HFR6 and HFR7):Two different IIR low pass filters with filter order 7 at cut-off frequencies, 30 Hz (HFR6) and 60 Hz (HFR7) to be below or at/above the line frequency noise present in each dataset [20]. This filter serves as a weighted running average with an 11-element kernel size.6)Butterworth Low Pass Filters (HFR6 and HFR7):Two different IIR low pass filters with filter order 7 at cut-off frequencies, 30 Hz (HFR6) and 60 Hz (HFR7) to be below or at/above the line frequency noise present in each dataset [20]. This filter serves as a weighted running average with an 11-element kernel size.6)Butterworth Low Pass Filters (HFR6 and HFR7):Two different IIR low pass filters with filter order 7 at cut-off frequencies, 30 Hz (HFR6) and 60 Hz (HFR7) to be below or at/above the line frequency noise present in each dataset [20]. Recent clinical validation studies have also shown large variability in activation map reconstruction accuracy (correlation from −0.68 to 0.82 in one study [9], 0.29 to 0.80 in another [10]). Tank signals which were absent or of poor quality were excluded from the computations (3 ± 2 channels removed). After the forward matrix is obtained for these refined meshes, the rows corresponding to torso measurement electrodes were sampled to form a reduced forward matrix, which we denote as A in (1), relating the electrograms (in the refined epicardial meshes) to torso measurements. C.Inverse Problem SolutionInverse solutions were found by applying the Tikhonov regularization method [22] to the problem in (1) at each time instant separately. C.Inverse Problem SolutionInverse solutions were found by applying the Tikhonov regularization method [22] to the problem in (1) at each time instant separately. Thus, time index was removed from the following description of the method. Thus, time index was removed from the following description of the method. EVALUATION METHODS 