For the early stage, the term “mild cognitive impairment” (MCI), and specifically the amnestic subtype (aMCI), has been widely used in previous studies (Petersen 2011), especially before the revision of the definition of early or prodromal AD by Dubois et al  (2010). face-name pairs and were consequently included in both subgroup analyses. The results are shown in supplementary Table S1. The results are shown in supplementary Table S1. The results are shown in supplementary Table S1. Previous functional neuroimaging research on memory encoding and episodic retrieval in MCI reported attenuated hippocampal activation in line with findings in AD (Hanseeuw et al  2011; Hampstead et al  2011; Jin et al  2012). In MCI patients, hippocampal activation has been contradictorily described as both elevated (Celone et al  2006; Kircher et al  2007; Hämäläinen et al  2007) and reduced (Hanseeuw et al  2011; Hampstead et al  2011; Giovanello et al  2012) compared to age-matched healthy controls. These discrepancies may be explained by a longitudinal study suggesting that elevated hippocampal activation only occurs in early stages of the disease and precedes decline in cognition and hippocampal activation (O’Brien et al  2010). Understanding of the underlying neuropathological processes can be augmented by studies which reported neurofibrillary tangles within the earliest stages of the disease as well as amyloid β protein (Aβ) depositions in later stages (Braak and Braak 1991; Braak et al  2006). Neurofibrillary tangles lead to dysfunctions and disconnections accompanied by impaired function of the affected regions already in MCI patients (Bokde et al  2006). In addition to the above-mentioned involvement in encoding tasks, the hippocampus has been previously associated with episodic retrieval (Hayes et al  2004; Kühn and Gallinat 2013), especially retrieval success (Nyberg et al  1996; Schacter et al  1999; Hayes et al  2004). The fusiform gyrus is anatomically and functionally adjacent to the hippocampus and has been highlighted during face recognition (McCarthy et al  1996; Lim et al  2011) and colour processing (Wang et al  2013). In addition to the above-mentioned histopathological findings in the hippocampus in AD, the CA1 region has shown decreased metabolic responses (Salehi and Swaab 1999). Considering the normal function of the precuneus, activation during memory tasks has been described as an encoding/retrieval flip (Huijbers et al  2012) implying that the BOLD-signal is negative (lower than during resting baseline conditions) in encoding tasks (“deactivation”). AD-related histopathological changes in the precuneus have mainly been associated with extracellular Aβ depositions in later stages of the disease, such as Braak IV-VI (Braak and Braak 1991; Braak et al  2006). Healthy subjects with elevated levels of Aβ depositions showed highly aberrant patterns of default network fMRI activation (Celone et al  2006; Sperling et al  2009). Less deactivation or stronger activation during demanding encoding tasks compared to undemanding tasks in the precuneus has been suggested as prognostic for the development of AD in at-risk stages such as MCI (Petrella et al  2007). Our observation that MCI patients were spared from precuneus dysfunctions is supported by a study reporting that cholinergic activity was maintained regardless of PiB binding and amyloid burden in postmortem brains (Ikonomovic et al  2011). atrophy) in MCI patients (Nickl-Jockschat et al  2012) while neuropathological studies found increasing amyloid plaque deposition over the course of the AD continuum (Braak and Braak 1991; Buckner et al  2005). The anterior part in particular is connected to the frontal lobe and specifically active during attention and memory retrieval paradigms (here only right-hemispheric) revealed by meta-analysis (Kurth et al  2010). It is further believed to play an active role in language processing (McCarthy et al  1993; Price 2000; Kurth et al  2010), whilst its function was more recently described as a very basic planning of general orofacial functions independent of actual words (Price 2010). Neurofibrillary tangles have been reported in this region in the latest stages IV to VI in AD (Braak et al  2006). MCI patients showed impaired verbal memory performance (Giovanello et al  2012) and activation likelihood in the afore-mentioned cluster was correlated with the lowest MMSE scores during retrieval of verbal stimuli. The precuneus might be prognostic to distinguish between high and low risk of conversion to AD (Schroeter et al  2009). Stronger left-hemispheric activation was earlier observed during encoding of verbal stimuli, while images, faces, scenes or patterns have been described as being processed bilaterally or right-hemispherically (Kelley et al  1998; Schacter et al  1999; Golby et al  2001; Rosazza et al  2009). However, according to a recent meta-analysis on insula functions, bilateral verbal processing within the insula seems to be an exception from general left-hemispheric lateralisation in verbal tasks (Kurth et al  2010). In further support of our findings, unilateral right anterior insula activation has been reported as being specific for memory tasks (Kurth et al  2010).Stimulus specificity has not yet been reported for the precuneus during encoding tasks. Future studies should examine more homogeneous prodromal AD groups by applying the revised diagnostic criteria by Dubois et al  (2010). Accordingly, a meta-analysis was carried out using an advanced activation likelihood estimation (ALE), which is a powerful tool to quantitatively converge different studies and to identify consistent patterns of group differences (Eickhoff et al  2009). Two ALE meta-analyses have previously been published in the field of episodic memory in AD (Schwindt and Black 2009; Browndyke et al  2012). In contrast to the second meta-analysis (Browndyke et al  2012), we chose to restrict our meta-analysis to whole-brain studies rather than including work derived from smaller fields of view, which is biased by a hypothesis-driven analysis. As most studies were performed prior to the revision of diagnostic research criteria for AD and prodromal as well as preclinical stages in 2010 (Dubois et al  2010), studies on MCI mainly used the proposed criteria by Petersen (Petersen et al  1999; Petersen 2011). For the same reason, AD patients fulfilled diagnostic criteria proposed by the National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke and the Alzheimer’s Disease and Related Disorders Association (NINCDS-ADRDA, McKhann et al  1984). Three studies (Celone et al  2006; Heun et al  2007; Kircher et al  2007) particularly described objective memory deficits as inclusion criteria in line with an aMCI diagnosis. For encoding, we included intentional and incidental memory from block design studies as well as encoding phases from working memory if they had been reported separately from retrieval based on an event-related design (Peters et al  2009). Given that differential neural correlates have been proposed for episodic retrieval and working memory (Cabeza et al  2002), we aimed at selectively including episodic retrieval. Based on this criterion, we rejected three retrieval experiments which had only one or two stimuli per condition (Gould et al  2005; Peters et al  2009; Bokde et al  2010).Direct comparison of study population and a group of age-matched controls.Stereotactic whole-brain coordinates were reported in a standardised reference space [Talairach or Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space] for the location of activation differences between MCI or AD, respectively, and controls.Independent study samples without overlapStudies solely focusing on drug effects were excluded.We contacted authors for missing data if the publications were otherwise suitable for our meta-analysis. Functional neuroimaging studies have identified several encoding-related brain activation patterns including the dorsolateral and ventrolateral prefrontal cortices, intraparietal sulcus/superior parietal lobule, medial temporal lobe (MTL) and adjacent occipito-temporal areas (Spaniol et al  2009). The MTL encompasses the hippocampal formation which is essential for long-term storage of memory (Scoville and Milner 2000; Squire et al  2004), the parahippocampal gyrus (PHG) which plays an important role in episodic encoding and spatial navigation (Kühn and Gallinat 2013), the perirhinal and entorhinal cortices and the amygdala. Instructions for encoding phases explicitly required the subjects to intentionally memorise the stimuli with the exception of “incidental” memory (Mandzia et al  2009), whereby the subjects performed a distraction task (i.e. Finally, Pariente et al  (2005) directly compared the encoding or recognition phases of AD patients to controls without subtracting any referential conditions before.To guarantee comparability of MCI and AD studies in the respective contrasts (encoding, retrieval), we statistically compared mean age and MMSE scores. Importantly, brain activation patterns have been reported to be rather left-hemispheric for verbal stimuli while bilateral or preferably right-hemispheric for images (Buckner et al  1996; Kelley et al  1998; Golby et al  2001). ALE algorithmA revised version (Eickhoff et al  2012) of the ALE approach for coordinate-based meta-analysis of neuroimaging data (Turkeltaub et al  2002; Laird et al  2009; Eickhoff et al  2009) was used to test for significant convergence of episodic memory-associated brain activation in MCI and AD. Larger sample sizes are believed to provide data closer to the real value, and the belonging Gaussian distribution is thus smaller (Eickhoff et al  2009). The probabilities of all foci reported in a given experiment were then combined for each voxel, resulting in a modelled activation (MA) map (Turkeltaub et al  2012). noise), ALE scores were compared to an analytically derived null-distribution reflecting a random spatial association between experiments (Eickhoff et al  2012). The extent-threshold necessary to control the cluster-level family-wise error (cFWE) rate was derived from a Monte-Carlo simulation of the excursion-set above cluster-forming threshold based on the analysis of randomly distributed foci under otherwise identical settings.All resulting clusters of the relative activation differences were labelled using the SPM Anatomy Toolbox v1.8 (Eickhoff et al  2005, 2007). The Anatomy Toolbox provides maximum probability maps, which represent a summary of different histological maps and allows attribution of each voxel of the reference space to the most likely cytoarchitectonic area (Eickhoff et al  2005). Assuming MCI to be part of the continuum from healthy ageing to AD (Buckner et al  2005), we searched for convergent clusters within MCI and AD patients compared to controls by generating encoding and retrieval maps for the MCI and AD groups pooled together for the published contrasts [‘MCI > Controls’ AND ‘AD > Controls’] and [‘Controls > MCI’ AND ‘Controls > AD], further referred to as “MCI + AD > Controls” and “Controls > MCI + AD”, respectively. 