A linear contrast was performed with the weights (-3, -1, 1, 3) for the first to fourth trials, respectively, for the regular and random tool use groups combined. The original dataset was divided into two halves, each containing three blocks of trials (near, middle, and far, in counterbalanced order), and the median RT, percentage errors, and IE scores were analysed with a mixed ANOVA as before, except now including the variable experiment half (first half, second half). Performance was worse in the first half of the experiment (RT=690±15ms, error=6.9±0.1%, IE=764±24ms) as compared to the second half (RT=615±15ms, error=5.7±0.1%, IE=672±23ms). Performance was worse in the first half of the experiment (RT=690±15ms, error=6.9±0.1%, IE=764±24ms) as compared to the second half (RT=615±15ms, error=5.7±0.1%, IE=672±23ms). Performance was worse in the first half of the experiment (RT=690±15ms, error=6.9±0.1%, IE=764±24ms) as compared to the second half (RT=615±15ms, error=5.7±0.1%, IE=672±23ms). Importantly, there were no significant interactions with the variable congruency - no changes in the magnitude or spatial distribution of multisensory interactions across the two halves of the experiment.The temporal modulations of the crossmodal congruency effects support the ‘general movement preparation’ hypothesis, and contradict both the ‘long-lasting modulation hypothesis’, and the ‘spatially-specific movement preparation hypothesis’.Following the suggestion of one of our reviewers, we also performed an additional experiment in which twenty-four new naïve participants directed a laser pointer at the distant tool use target (which was replaced with a 5mm diameter laser-detecting diode). Second, these results suggest that the general increase in crossmodal congruency effects as a function of trial order reported above is not specific to tool use, but rather may occur for any target-directed manual motor activity, such as reaching and pointing with a laser to a distant visual target. Temporal modulation of the crossmodal congruency effectThe data reported here show a clear effect of tool use movement preparation (i.e., the interaction between congruency and trial order) on the magnitude of multisensory interactions measured along two hand-held tools. Conversely, in the random tool use group, crossmodal congruency effects on the first trial after tool use were nearly ten times higher than on the same trial in the regular tool use group (88ms), while the second to fourth trials in this group showed effects similar to those of the regular tool use group. In the control laser-pointing task, the significant linear effect of trial order supports the conclusion that movement-preparation in general, and not specifically tool-use preparation, was driving the significant temporal modulations of the crossmodal congruency effect that we reported.These data clearly favour the ‘general movement preparation’ hypothesis over both the ‘long-lasting modulation’ and the ‘spatially-specific movement preparation’ hypotheses. In the control laser-pointing task, the significant linear effect of trial order supports the conclusion that movement-preparation in general, and not specifically tool-use preparation, was driving the significant temporal modulations of the crossmodal congruency effect that we reported.These data clearly favour the ‘general movement preparation’ hypothesis over both the ‘long-lasting modulation’ and the ‘spatially-specific movement preparation’ hypotheses. In the control laser-pointing task, the significant linear effect of trial order supports the conclusion that movement-preparation in general, and not specifically tool-use preparation, was driving the significant temporal modulations of the crossmodal congruency effect that we reported.These data clearly favour the ‘general movement preparation’ hypothesis over both the ‘long-lasting modulation’ and the ‘spatially-specific movement preparation’ hypotheses. In the control laser-pointing task, the significant linear effect of trial order supports the conclusion that movement-preparation in general, and not specifically tool-use preparation, was driving the significant temporal modulations of the crossmodal congruency effect that we reported.These data clearly favour the ‘general movement preparation’ hypothesis over both the ‘long-lasting modulation’ and the ‘spatially-specific movement preparation’ hypotheses. In the control laser-pointing task, the significant linear effect of trial order supports the conclusion that movement-preparation in general, and not specifically tool-use preparation, was driving the significant temporal modulations of the crossmodal congruency effect that we reported.These data clearly favour the ‘general movement preparation’ hypothesis over both the ‘long-lasting modulation’ and the ‘spatially-specific movement preparation’ hypotheses. This hypothesis also predicted that crossmodal congruency effects in the random tool use group would remain high and relatively constant across trial order, since the ‘Go’ cue for the tool use task could have been presented at any time after the preceding tool use trial. Furthermore, the absence of any significant differences between the first and second halves of the tool use experiments suggests that the effects of tool use on multisensory peripersonal space were either too rapid, transient, weak, or variable to be detected by our experimental design. They showed that repeatedly crossing two tools in opposite directions over the midline (i.e., a different tool use task to the one used here), led to a significant change in spatial modulations following active tool use, specifically in the last four blocks of trials, as compared to the first four blocks.The relevant behavioural cue informing the participants to begin the tool and laser use tasks was an additional visual target stimulus (an LED) placed 100cm away from the hands, and 67cm above the table surface (60cm above the tools). Furthermore, while the laser use experiment resulted in similar temporal effects as those found in the regular tool use experiment (a linear increase across trial order), very different spatial effects emerged (i.e., no significant effect of side in the middles or at the tips of the tools). There is now a pressing need to account for the potentially different neural mechanisms and behavioural processes underlying these immediate (or trial-by-trial) effects, as compared to the longer-lasting effects of tool use training on multisensory interactions measured up to several minutes after tool use (see, for example, Weiss et al  2000 for a neuroimaging study of line bisection performance). )We believe that the most likely explanation for the difference between tool use and laser use (or any other non-tool use task) is therefore that actively holding a recently-used or soon-to-be-used tool is accompanied by a shift of attention in depth to the tips of the tools. However, it is not yet clear whether these different experimental approaches are equally applicable to understanding multisensory peripersonal space, or whether instead the choice of experimental design may affect the particular results obtained. In addition, the effects of tool use on more general aspects of visuospatial attention, movement preparation, and sensorimotor cueing, have not, as yet, been systematically investigated in either healthy participants or in patients with crossmodal extinction. Our series of tool use experiments have mostly followed what we term the ‘interleaved’ design of tool use experiments - individual tool use movement trials are interleaved with trials of the task used to measure peripersonal space (i.e., the crossmodal congruency task used in the present manuscript, and Holmes et al  2004; Maravita et al  2002b; see also Holmes et al  2007, for different designs). The tool use task in Maravita and colleagues’ experiment involved actively maintaining the tool in position, and checking the tool location repeatedly during the testing period, but between trials. The tool use task in Maravita and colleagues’ experiment involved actively maintaining the tool in position, and checking the tool location repeatedly during the testing period, but between trials. The tool use task in Maravita and colleagues’ experiment involved actively maintaining the tool in position, and checking the tool location repeatedly during the testing period, but between trials. The tool use task in Maravita and colleagues’ experiment involved actively maintaining the tool in position, and checking the tool location repeatedly during the testing period, but between trials. The tool use task in Maravita and colleagues’ experiment involved actively maintaining the tool in position, and checking the tool location repeatedly during the testing period, but between trials. The tool use task in Maravita and colleagues’ experiment involved actively maintaining the tool in position, and checking the tool location repeatedly during the testing period, but between trials. The effects of task instructions on how participants and patients orient their attention during the testing phase of tool use studies has yet to be investigated, and represents an important question for future research on tool use. These diverse results suggest that it is not yet clear to what extent the reported multisensory effects of tool use are solely due to neural representations of hand-centred peripersonal space per se, or alternatively are due, at least in part, to shifts or biases in visual or multisensory spatial attention (see Holmes et al  2007, for five experiments investigating this point in more detail). In these studies, the participants were required to use one or two tools after every four trials of the crossmodal congruency task. In these studies, the participants were required to use one or two tools after every four trials of the crossmodal congruency task. The tool use task involved crossing or uncrossing the tools over the midline (Holmes et al  2007; Maravita et al  2002b), or reaching out with the tool to push distant target buttons (Holmes et al  2004). The tool use task involved crossing or uncrossing the tools over the midline (Holmes et al  2007; Maravita et al  2002b), or reaching out with the tool to push distant target buttons (Holmes et al  2004). In order to assess the possible effects of covert (and uninstructed) tool use movement preparation on multisensory interactions in peripersonal space, we therefore manipulated the temporal and spatial predictability of the required tool use task and analysed crossmodal congruency effects on a trial-by-trial basis. In the random tool use group, the tool use was required, on average, after every fourth trial, and half of the time with the left and half with the right hand and tool, but the sequence was pseudorandomised within each block of trials. In the random tool use group, the tool use was required, on average, after every fourth trial, and half of the time with the left and half with the right hand and tool, but the sequence was pseudorandomised within each block of trials. In the random tool use group, the tool use was required, on average, after every fourth trial, and half of the time with the left and half with the right hand and tool, but the sequence was pseudorandomised within each block of trials. In the random tool use group, the tool use was required, on average, after every fourth trial, and half of the time with the left and half with the right hand and tool, but the sequence was pseudorandomised within each block of trials. In the random tool use group, the tool use was required, on average, after every fourth trial, and half of the time with the left and half with the right hand and tool, but the sequence was pseudorandomised within each block of trials. If tool use movement preparation affects the magnitude or spatial distribution of crossmodal congruency effects, however, then one would expect to find significant effects of trial order and significant differences between the two groups of participants. One version of this hypothesis predicts, following previous results using a very similar task (Holmes et al  2004), that congruency effects will increase near the hands and at the tips of the tools (but not in the middles of the tools) as a function of trial order and tool use predictability. One version of this hypothesis predicts, following previous results using a very similar task (Holmes et al  2004), that congruency effects will increase near the hands and at the tips of the tools (but not in the middles of the tools) as a function of trial order and tool use predictability. By contrast, the regular tool use group should show maximal peripersonal space-like effects on trials immediately preceding a tool use movement - a significant interaction between the spatial and temporal experimental variables. The tool use task and target location were identical between the experiments, only the predictability of the tool required and the timing of the tool use task differed between groups.In the tool use task, one of two 10mm diameter red LEDs positioned next to the tool use targets on the left or right was illuminated as a ‘Go’ signal. The instructions to the participants emphasized the accuracy and skilful control of the tool use task over the speed of performance. On average, therefore, the participants spent a total of ∼15min performing the active tool use task. AnalysisThe data were pooled across the four vibrator positions as is standard practice for this task (since differences between specific hands or digits were not initially of theoretical interest), and were sorted by pooling according to the spatial relationships between the visual and vibrotactile stimuli, and the number of trials since the previous tool use task. The trend in this interaction was towards larger congruency effects in the random compared to the regular tool use group. The significant interaction between side and congruency, F(1,57)=9.06, p<.005, revealed larger congruency effects for same-side (mean=98ms) as compared to different-sides stimuli (52ms). The significant interaction between side and congruency, F(1,57)=9.06, p<.005, revealed larger congruency effects for same-side (mean=98ms) as compared to different-sides stimuli (52ms). The significant interaction between side and congruency, F(1,57)=9.06, p<.005, revealed larger congruency effects for same-side (mean=98ms) as compared to different-sides stimuli (52ms). The three-way interaction was, however, not significant for the RT or error data when considered singly, but both trends were in the same direction as for the IE data.The above results contradict the ‘spatially-specific movement preparation’ hypothesis, according to which spatial differences should have been observed between the two tool use groups. The three-way interaction was, however, not significant for the RT or error data when considered singly, but both trends were in the same direction as for the IE data.The above results contradict the ‘spatially-specific movement preparation’ hypothesis, according to which spatial differences should have been observed between the two tool use groups. The three-way interaction was, however, not significant for the RT or error data when considered singly, but both trends were in the same direction as for the IE data.The above results contradict the ‘spatially-specific movement preparation’ hypothesis, according to which spatial differences should have been observed between the two tool use groups. The three-way interaction was, however, not significant for the RT or error data when considered singly, but both trends were in the same direction as for the IE data.The above results contradict the ‘spatially-specific movement preparation’ hypothesis, according to which spatial differences should have been observed between the two tool use groups. The three-way interaction was, however, not significant for the RT or error data when considered singly, but both trends were in the same direction as for the IE data.The above results contradict the ‘spatially-specific movement preparation’ hypothesis, according to which spatial differences should have been observed between the two tool use groups. Furthermore, this interaction between trial order and congruency differed significantly between the two groups, F(3,171)=2.72, p<.05 (see Figure 3). In the regular tool use group, crossmodal congruency effects were absent on the first trial following tool use (M±SE=9±23ms), but were then significantly larger for each subsequent trial compared to the first (second=61±13ms, p<.05; third=75±18ms, p<.01; fourth=95±21ms, p<.001; main effect of trial for this group, F(3,87)=4.65, p<.005). In the random tool use group, however, the second trial (M±SE=51±13ms) differed significantly from the fourth (119±21ms, p<.005), but no other significant differences were found (main effect of trial order in this group, F(3,87)=2.83, p<.05; first trial=88±23ms, third trial=93±18ms). 