After staining, propidium iodide was added and the cells were analyzed on a FACScan flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson). Loading solution was replaced with HBSS containing anti-fluorescein antibody and TSP1. Statistical analysisAll data are shown as mean ± SD except were indicated. Statistical analysisAll data are shown as mean ± SD except were indicated. The difference was considered significant (*) when P ≤ 0.05, and (**) when P ≤ 0.001. Because macrophage recruitment into wounds is TSP1-dependent (1) we examined the effect of tumor cell TSP1 over expression on TAM recruitment. Using the previously described conditions of injection in the mammary fat pads (26), we confirmed that TH26 tumors showed delayed growth in female NIH-bg/nu mice relative to control-transfected clones (data not shown). Using the previously described conditions of injection in the mammary fat pads (26), we confirmed that TH26 tumors showed delayed growth in female NIH-bg/nu mice relative to control-transfected clones (data not shown). Interestingly, stimulation with 3 μg/ml of soluble recombinant 3TSR, the type 1 repeat domain of TSP1 responsible for the TSP1-mediated activation of latent TGFβ (37), resulted in no significant change in total PAI-1 release from differentiated U937 cells (Fig. In addition, TSP1 enhances cytokine-induced respiratory burst of human neutrophils (13) and enhances chemoattractant FMLP-mediated superoxide anion (O2−) generation by human neutrophils through its N-terminal domain (14, 15). Furthermore, increased PAI-1 secretion was detected in cell culture supernatants within 4 h after TGFβ or TSP1 treatment (data not shown). Immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated strong PAI-1 staining in the TH26 TAMs (Fig. Increased M1 macrophage recruitment into TSP1 over-expressing tumorsActivated murine macrophages metabolize L-arginine via two main pathways that are catalyzed by the inducible enzymes iNOS and arginase. Increased M1 macrophage recruitment into TSP1 over-expressing tumorsActivated murine macrophages metabolize L-arginine via two main pathways that are catalyzed by the inducible enzymes iNOS and arginase. Increased M1 macrophage recruitment into TSP1 over-expressing tumorsActivated murine macrophages metabolize L-arginine via two main pathways that are catalyzed by the inducible enzymes iNOS and arginase. A 3.8-fold increase in iNOS expression was found in TH26 tumors (Fig. A 3.8-fold increase in iNOS expression was found in TH26 tumors (Fig. TSP1 stimulates Macrophage Cytotoxicity towards Breast Carcinoma and Melanoma CellsTo determine whether TSP1 can regulate tumor cell killing by macrophages, we performed dynamic monitoring of macrophage-mediated cytolysis. IFN-γ differentiated U937 cells were incubated with MDA-MB-231 breast carcinoma cells (at an E:T ratio of 40:1) in the RT-CES system. IFN-γ differentiated U937 cells were incubated with MDA-MB-231 breast carcinoma cells (at an E:T ratio of 40:1) in the RT-CES system. This also indicates that TSP1 stimulates extracellular O2− production because SOD does not degrade intracellular O2−. The α6β1-binding peptide LALERKDHSG (24) and a function-blocking α6β1 antibody partially inhibited the activity of TSP1 on O2− generation. These results identify a specific requirement for α6β1 integrin to mediate TSP1 binding to human monocytes and the subsequent activation of intracellular signaling pathways required for O2− production (Fig. TSP1-stimulated O2− production in macrophages requires intracellular Ca2+Ligation of some integrins triggers a transient elevation in intracellular free Ca2+ (43, 44). This result suggested that increased levels of Ca2+ might account for the enhancement by TSP1 of O2− production in differentiated U937 cells. This result suggested that increased levels of Ca2+ might account for the enhancement by TSP1 of O2− production in differentiated U937 cells. This result suggested that increased levels of Ca2+ might account for the enhancement by TSP1 of O2− production in differentiated U937 cells. As shown in Fig. Several studies have suggested that TSP1 plays an important role in the recruitment of monocytes and macrophages to sites of tissue injury or inflammation (1, 12). This acute change in PAI-1 expression in response to TSP1 is at least partially TGFβ-mediated. M2 macrophages are present in most established tumors and promote tumor progression (18). Therefore, U937 monocytes have the capacity to differentiate along both pathways, but TSP1 selectively enhances the cytotoxic effector function of M1 macrophages. Interactions between integrins and their ligands can trigger transient elevation in intracellular free Ca2+ (43, 44), and Ca2+ is a well known intracellular second messenger for signaling the generation of O2− in human monocytes (45). However, we can not exclude the possibility that additional receptors recognized by the N-domains of TSP1 might contribute to O2− production by macrophages. Our data suggests this may involve both suppression of angiogenesis and enhancement of innate anti-tumor immunity. Our data suggests this may involve both suppression of angiogenesis and enhancement of innate anti-tumor immunity. Our data suggests this may involve both suppression of angiogenesis and enhancement of innate anti-tumor immunity. Soluble TSP1 at 5 μg/ml was sufficient to increase U937-mediated cytotoxicity in all tumor cell targets tested. Soluble TSP1 at 5 μg/ml was sufficient to increase U937-mediated cytotoxicity in all tumor cell targets tested. This activity is generally attributed to angiogenesis inhibition, but the above results suggest that effects on tumor immunity should also be considered. This activity is generally attributed to angiogenesis inhibition, but the above results suggest that effects on tumor immunity should also be considered. This activity is generally attributed to angiogenesis inhibition, but the above results suggest that effects on tumor immunity should also be considered. This activity is generally attributed to angiogenesis inhibition, but the above results suggest that effects on tumor immunity should also be considered. This activity is generally attributed to angiogenesis inhibition, but the above results suggest that effects on tumor immunity should also be considered. Proteins and peptidesHuman TSP1 was purified from the supernatant of thrombin-activated platelets obtained from the NIH Blood Bank (20). Proteins and peptidesHuman TSP1 was purified from the supernatant of thrombin-activated platelets obtained from the NIH Blood Bank (20). Recombinant proteins containing various domains of TSP1 and TSP2 were prepared as previously described and provided by Dr. Deane Mosher (21-23). Rabbit polyclonal to plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 (PAI-1) and rabbit polyclonal to inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) were from Abcam Inc. Anti-actin (Ab-1) mouse monoclonal antibody and EGTA were from Calbiochem. FITC-conjugated rat anti-human α6 monoclonal antibody (clone G0H3) and the isotype control were from BD Biosciences. TSP1-null mice display acute and chronic inflammatory pulmonary infiltrates, and an elevated number of circulating white blood cells (3), suggesting an anti-inflammatory role. TSP1-null mice display acute and chronic inflammatory pulmonary infiltrates, and an elevated number of circulating white blood cells (3), suggesting an anti-inflammatory role. The human monocytic line U937 (27) kindly provided by Dr. Mark Raffeld (NCI, NIH, Bethesda, MD) was cultured at 37 °C, 5% CO2, in RPMI-1640 supplemented with 2 mM glutamine, 100 units/ml penicillin, 100 μg/ml streptomycin, and 10% endotoxin tested FBS (Biosource). In contrast, TSP1 expression in ischemic injuries limits tissue survival and restoration of perfusion by blocking NO/cGMP signaling (4). Tumorigenesis assay in nude miceGroups of 10 female NIH-bg/nu mice, approximately 8 weeks of age, were injected in the mammary fat pads with 8×105 Neo or TH26 cells. Primary tumor size was determined twice weekly, and tumor volume was calculated as (width)2 × length/2. After washing the slides with Wash Buffer Solution (Dako Corporation), non-specific binding was reduced using Protein Block Serum-Free (Dako Corporation) for 10 min. The slides were incubated with CD68 antibody (1:100, overnight at 4 °C), PAI-1 antibody (dilution 1:250, 1 h at RT), iNOS antibody (1:50, 1 h at RT). Cytoplasmic staining in macrophages was considered positive for iNOS. Cytoplasmic staining in macrophages was considered positive for iNOS. Cell lysates (15 μg protein) were boiled for 5 min in SDS-sample buffer, electrophoretically-separated on NuPAGE 10% Bis-Tris gels (Invitrogen) for 1.5 h at 150V and transferred to Immobilon-P polyvinylidene difluoride membranes (Millipore) for 2 h at 100V. TSP1 plays several roles in the physiological functions of phagocytes. Membranes were blocked in 5% BSA/0.1% Tween 20/PBS and incubated overnight with rabbit polyclonal to PAI-1 (2.5 μg/ml). cDNA was synthesized from total RNA using iScript cDNA Synthesis Kit (BioRad). cDNA was synthesized from total RNA using iScript cDNA Synthesis Kit (BioRad). TSP1 mediates phagocytosis of neutrophils undergoing apoptosis (6). TSP1 mediates phagocytosis of neutrophils undergoing apoptosis (6). 