HCT116+5 exhibited high levels of MSI at all loci examined, suggesting that lack of MLH1 expression results in MSI not only at loci with [A]n and [CA]n repeats, but also at EMAST loci. However, there is another type of MSI where mutations rarely occur at loci with mono- or dinucleotide repeats, but occur frequently at loci with tri- or tetranucleotide repeats (2, 6). However, there is another type of MSI where mutations rarely occur at loci with mono- or dinucleotide repeats, but occur frequently at loci with tri- or tetranucleotide repeats (2, 6). However, there is another type of MSI where mutations rarely occur at loci with mono- or dinucleotide repeats, but occur frequently at loci with tri- or tetranucleotide repeats (2, 6). However, there is another type of MSI where mutations rarely occur at loci with mono- or dinucleotide repeats, but occur frequently at loci with tri- or tetranucleotide repeats (2, 6). GFP-positive clones were further subjected to Western blot analysis for MSH3 expression. Comparing G5 cells with G5 cells exposed to Dox, there was no difference in the expression levels of any of the other MMR proteins, including MLH1 (Fig. These results indicate that down-regulation of MSH3 can be specifically controlled by the expression of MSH3-specific siRNA.We next isolated ∼70 independent clones each from G5 cells and G5 cells exposed to Dox during clonal growth, and performed single clone MSI analysis for five consensus NCI markers (BAT25, BAT26, D2S123, D5S346, D17S250) and 3 EMAST markers (MYCL1, D19S394 and D9S242). Increase in instability at certain tetranucleotide repeat markers containing [AAAG]n or [ATAG]n is frequently found in non-small cell lung (7, 8), head and neck (8), bladder (8, 9, 10), kidney (8), skin (9) and ovarian (11) cancers. Taken together, the results indicate that loss of MSH3 results in a high degree of instability at EMAST loci, and in a lower degree of instability at microsatellites with [CA]n repeats. High incidence of EMAST tumors in human CRCThe above results suggest that some MSI-L in CRC may be due to MSH3 deficiency. If this is the case, 46% of CRC (19 cases of MSI-L/EMAST and 35 case of MSS/EMAST) could be affected by MSH3-dificiency.In MSI-H/EMAST cases, the high frequency of mutations at EMAST loci can be entirely explained by MLH1 deficiency. Because only 19 cases from our UCSD cohort were available for IHC studies, an additional 27 samples were obtained from a second cohort of 88 sporadic CRC cases collected at Toho University, Japan. Because only 19 cases from our UCSD cohort were available for IHC studies, an additional 27 samples were obtained from a second cohort of 88 sporadic CRC cases collected at Toho University, Japan. As a positive control for MSH3-negativity, we stained CRCs known to be negative for MSH2 expression, because MSH3 is unstable and not detected in these tumors. Three EMAST/MSH3-negative tumors were found to contain sub-regions with a high percentage of MSH3-negative cells (31∼79%) as well as a sub-region with a high percentage of MSH3-positive cells (90∼96%) (Supplementary Figure S2). Three randomly chosen regions of CR337, CR067 and 115 tumors were analyzed for EMAST. According to the current model, DNA mismatch recognition is mediated by MutSα, a heterodimer of MSH2 and MSH6, or MutSβ, a heterodimer of MSH2 and MSH3 (14, 15, 16). Furthermore, over-expression of glucose transporter-1, an indicator of hypoxic response (32), correlates with MSH3-negativity and EMAST in the CRC tissues examined in this study. Both MutSα and MutSβ recognize small insertion/deletion loops (IDLs) with up to 10 unpaired nucleotides (17, 18). Further studies are needed to establish the validity of this classification.Overall, our data show that loss of MSH3 is associated with instability at EMAST loci and low levels of instability at microsatellite loci with dinucleotide repeats in both cell lines and CRC tissues. Colorectal cancers (CRC) exhibiting MSI can be classified as MSI-high (MSI-H) or MSI-low (MSI-L), based on frequency of mutations at microsatellite loci (1, 2). Colorectal cancers (CRC) exhibiting MSI can be classified as MSI-high (MSI-H) or MSI-low (MSI-L), based on frequency of mutations at microsatellite loci (1, 2). HCT116 cells were grown in Dulbecco's modified Eagle medium with 10% fetal bovine serum. Mouse A9 cells containing a blasticidin resistant gene-marked human chromosome 5 (A9+5) (24) were maintained in growth medium containing 6 μg/ml blasticidin S (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Microcell-Mediated Chromosome TransferThe method for microcell-mediated chromosome transfer has been described (24). Microcell-Mediated Chromosome TransferThe method for microcell-mediated chromosome transfer has been described (24). After 24 h, the cells were trypsinized, pelleted, resuspended, and plated into growth medium containing 6 μg/ml of blasticidin S. After 10 days, growing colonies were isolated, expanded and analyzed for hMSH3 expression. The gel was silver-stained with a SilverXpress kit (Invitrogen). hMSH3 cDNA was prepared by reverse transcriptase using a forward primer (5′-GACTGTTTGTTCAT GTACGC-3′) and a reverse primer (5′-ACTATCAAACACAACCTCGC-3′), and sequenced using an ABI PRISM dye terminator kit with an ABI 373 fluorescent sequencer (Applied Biosystems). Vector Construction, DNA Transfection, siRNA ExpressionThe tetracycline-regulated retroviral vector, TMP (Open Biosystems, Huntsville, AL) was used to construct a plasmid expressing siRNA against the hMSH3 message. Vector Construction, DNA Transfection, siRNA ExpressionThe tetracycline-regulated retroviral vector, TMP (Open Biosystems, Huntsville, AL) was used to construct a plasmid expressing siRNA against the hMSH3 message. The vector contains a tetracycline regulated Pol II promoter that directs expression of downstream genes including a puromycin resistance gene and GFP genes under the regulation of the transcription factor tTA. Nineteen coded oligonucleotides (5′-GCAAGGAGTTATGGATTAA-3′) in exon 23 of the hMSH3 gene (26) were inserted into the TMP vector. After heat denaturation, amplified PCR products were electrophoresed on an ABI PRISM 3100 Avant Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) and analyzed by GeneMapper fragment analysis software (Applied Biosystems). After heat denaturation, amplified PCR products were electrophoresed on an ABI PRISM 3100 Avant Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) and analyzed by GeneMapper fragment analysis software (Applied Biosystems). Tumors were categorized as follows: 1) MSI-H: tumors exhibiting MSI at three or more of the seven mono- or dinucleotide; 2) MSI-L: tumors exhibiting MSI at one or two of the seven markers; 3) MSS: tumors which did not exhibit MSI at any of the seven markers; 4) EMAST: tumors exhibiting MSI at more than one locus among the seven EMAST markers; and 5) Non-EMAST: tumors which did not show MSI at any of the EMAST markers. After antigen retrieval (121°C for 15 min in 0.01 M citrate buffer, pH 6.0), the tissues were treated with anti-MSH3 antibody (28) overnight at 4°C, followed by incubation with secondary antibody.Staining was developed by diaminobenzide chromogen and counterstained with hematoxylin. Statistical AnalysisGroups were compared using Fisher's exact test, the chi-square test, Student's t-test, and the Steel-Dwass test. Analyses were performed using JMP software, version 5.1 (SAS Institute) and Excel Statistics for Windows 2006 software (Social Survey Research Information Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). Analyses were performed using JMP software, version 5.1 (SAS Institute) and Excel Statistics for Windows 2006 software (Social Survey Research Information Co., Ltd., Tokyo, Japan). The MLH1-deficiency in HCT116 is corrected by stable transfer of a normal copy of human chromosome 3 into HCT116+3 (24). The MLH1-deficiency in HCT116 is corrected by stable transfer of a normal copy of human chromosome 3 into HCT116+3 (24). These cancers rarely exhibit MSI in loci containing mononucleotide repeats (1); however, they often exhibit MSI at the MYCL1 locus, which harbors [AAAG]n tetranucleotide repeats (2, 5). These cancers rarely exhibit MSI in loci containing mononucleotide repeats (1); however, they often exhibit MSI at the MYCL1 locus, which harbors [AAAG]n tetranucleotide repeats (2, 5). These cancers rarely exhibit MSI in loci containing mononucleotide repeats (1); however, they often exhibit MSI at the MYCL1 locus, which harbors [AAAG]n tetranucleotide repeats (2, 5). These cancers rarely exhibit MSI in loci containing mononucleotide repeats (1); however, they often exhibit MSI at the MYCL1 locus, which harbors [AAAG]n tetranucleotide repeats (2, 5). In contrast, a comparable mutation frequency was observed at EMAST loci in HCT116+3 and HCT116, including MYCL1, D19S394 and D9S242 (Table 1; Supplementary Table S1). 