Haemagglutinin monomers, which fold cotranslationally and adopt a stable disulphide-bonded conformation, assemble into a homotrimeric complex prior to ER exit. Another well-studied example in which some of these phenomena are evident is the assembly of secreted immunoglobulin, which requires the formation of disulphide bonds between heavy chains (HCs) and light chains (LCs). Substrate targeting Substrate targeting Substrate targeting Substrate targeting It is thought that these factors deliver ERAD substrates to the retrotranslocation channel80. It is thought that these factors deliver ERAD substrates to the retrotranslocation channel80. It is thought that these factors deliver ERAD substrates to the retrotranslocation channel80. When the ER is stressed, BiP can be titrated away to bind to misfolded substrates, in turn activating Ire1 (see figure, step 1). The processed mRNA is re-ligated by a tRNA ligase, Trl1, and translated. Hac1 then translocates into the nucleus, binds to UPR elements (UPREs) and possibly other sequences in the promoter region of target genes, and upregulates their expression.In higher eukaryotes, the UPR consists of three transducers, IRE1, PERK and activating transcription factor-6 (ATF6) (not shown)157. Here, it is proteolytically processed by the S1P and S2P intramembrane proteases to release the ATF6-fragment transcription factor. Here, it is proteolytically processed by the S1P and S2P intramembrane proteases to release the ATF6-fragment transcription factor. Here, it is proteolytically processed by the S1P and S2P intramembrane proteases to release the ATF6-fragment transcription factor. Here, it is proteolytically processed by the S1P and S2P intramembrane proteases to release the ATF6-fragment transcription factor. Interestingly, the IRE1 branch of the UPR seems to be anti-apoptotic, whereas persistent PERK signalling might trigger apoptosis158. 86), which are retrotranslocation channel candidates. 86), which are retrotranslocation channel candidates. It is unclear whether the EDEMs exhibit substrate specificity, whether every EDEM homologue acts as a mannosidase and whether binding to a distinct mannose-trimmed protein species is essential for substrate selection.Yos9 was uncovered in a genetic screen to identify components that participate in glycoprotein turnover87. It is unclear whether the EDEMs exhibit substrate specificity, whether every EDEM homologue acts as a mannosidase and whether binding to a distinct mannose-trimmed protein species is essential for substrate selection.Yos9 was uncovered in a genetic screen to identify components that participate in glycoprotein turnover87. It is unclear whether the EDEMs exhibit substrate specificity, whether every EDEM homologue acts as a mannosidase and whether binding to a distinct mannose-trimmed protein species is essential for substrate selection.Yos9 was uncovered in a genetic screen to identify components that participate in glycoprotein turnover87. It is unclear whether the EDEMs exhibit substrate specificity, whether every EDEM homologue acts as a mannosidase and whether binding to a distinct mannose-trimmed protein species is essential for substrate selection.Yos9 was uncovered in a genetic screen to identify components that participate in glycoprotein turnover87. OS9 interacts with an ER-luminal Hsp90 homologue, 94 kDa glucose-regulated protein (GRP94), and detects the NHK α1-antitrypsin variant for delivery to the mammalian HRD1 complex92. OS9 interacts with an ER-luminal Hsp90 homologue, 94 kDa glucose-regulated protein (GRP94), and detects the NHK α1-antitrypsin variant for delivery to the mammalian HRD1 complex92. Initial evidence suggested that the Sec61 translocation channel has a secondary role as the retrotranslocation channel (the retrotranslocon). Initial evidence suggested that the Sec61 translocation channel has a secondary role as the retrotranslocation channel (the retrotranslocon). Third, the pre-binding of ribosome-nascent chain complexes to the Sec61 channel in ER-derived vesicles abrogated the retrotranslocation of cholera toxin97. Third, the pre-binding of ribosome-nascent chain complexes to the Sec61 channel in ER-derived vesicles abrogated the retrotranslocation of cholera toxin97. Third, the pre-binding of ribosome-nascent chain complexes to the Sec61 channel in ER-derived vesicles abrogated the retrotranslocation of cholera toxin97. It might also be that the differential binding of Sec61 partners re-engineers the channel for the opposing functions of translocation and retrotranslocation. It might also be that the differential binding of Sec61 partners re-engineers the channel for the opposing functions of translocation and retrotranslocation. It might also be that the differential binding of Sec61 partners re-engineers the channel for the opposing functions of translocation and retrotranslocation. It might also be that the differential binding of Sec61 partners re-engineers the channel for the opposing functions of translocation and retrotranslocation. The C-terminal Gly of Ub is adenylated by the E1 and then displaced following the nucleophilic attack of a conserved Cys residue in the E1, resulting in a thioester linkage between the E1 and Ub (see figure). Hence, it has been proposed that the E3s either form or are integral components of retrotranslocation channels105,106. Therefore, a channel might not always be necessary during ERAD. Therefore, a channel might not always be necessary during ERAD. Therefore, a channel might not always be necessary during ERAD. Therefore, a channel might not always be necessary during ERAD. Therefore, a channel might not always be necessary during ERAD. Therefore, a channel might not always be necessary during ERAD. Protein ubiquitylation, and thus proteasome-dependent degradation, requires the action of an E1 ubiquitin-activating enzyme, E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes and E3 ubiquitin ligases (BOX 3). The importance of chain extension during ERAD might derive from the fact that the polyubiquitin appendage must reach a crucial length before a substrate can be retrotranslocated110. The importance of chain extension during ERAD might derive from the fact that the polyubiquitin appendage must reach a crucial length before a substrate can be retrotranslocated110. The importance of chain extension during ERAD might derive from the fact that the polyubiquitin appendage must reach a crucial length before a substrate can be retrotranslocated110. The importance of chain extension during ERAD might derive from the fact that the polyubiquitin appendage must reach a crucial length before a substrate can be retrotranslocated110. Both enzymes contain catalytic RING domains and exhibit somewhat different preferences for unique E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes: Doa10-dependent ubiquitylation requires Ubc6 and Ubc7 (REF. Although the proteasome is sufficient in a few cases to retrotranslocate substrates122,123, another cytoplasmic protein complex, the cell-division cycle-48 (Cdc48) complex, has a more pivotal role in substrate retrotranslocation in both yeast and mammals124. In mammals, the Cdc48 homologue p97 similarly associates with conserved UFD1 and NPL4 homologues. RING domainA Cys-rich tandem zinc-finger domain of 40−60 amino acids that is found in the RING E3 enzymes, a main class of E3 ubiquitin ligases.HECT domain(Homologous to E6AP C terminus domain). A domain in the second largest class of E3 ubiquitin ligases. One possibility is that the Cdc48 complex might transiently embed into the putative retrotranslocon and then recognize and pull substrates into the cytoplasm. One possibility is that the Cdc48 complex might transiently embed into the putative retrotranslocon and then recognize and pull substrates into the cytoplasm. One possibility is that the Cdc48 complex might transiently embed into the putative retrotranslocon and then recognize and pull substrates into the cytoplasm. One possibility is that the Cdc48 complex might transiently embed into the putative retrotranslocon and then recognize and pull substrates into the cytoplasm. One possibility is that the Cdc48 complex might transiently embed into the putative retrotranslocon and then recognize and pull substrates into the cytoplasm. Two models were proposed to explain this observation: either TCR subunits are targeted to an unknown compartment for degradation or a specific protease resides within the ER10. Members of this family include UBA domain- and UBL domain-containing proteins, which interact both with the proteasome and with ubiquitylated substrates in the Cdc48 complex. Members of this family include UBA domain- and UBL domain-containing proteins, which interact both with the proteasome and with ubiquitylated substrates in the Cdc48 complex. Members of this family include UBA domain- and UBL domain-containing proteins, which interact both with the proteasome and with ubiquitylated substrates in the Cdc48 complex. Two factors in this class, Rad23 and Dsk2, increase ERAD efficiency108,131. It is unknown whether any of these factors are static members of the Cdc48 complex, or whether they bind to and deliver ERAD substrates to the proteasome by acting as mobile escorts.Ubiquitin receptors that are residents of the 19S proteasome subunit have also been identified. Recent data strongly suggest that Rpn13 mediates the highest affinity binding, and its position in the proteasome is consistent with it having a key role during substrate degradation134. Members of this growing family of enzymes can catalyse the en bloc removal of polyubiquitin moieties or catalyse the trimming of the polyubiquitin chain136. Furthermore, induction of the heat-shock response in yeast can compensate for ER stress that is caused by the overexpression of Cpy* in cells that lack inositol-requiring protein-1 (Ire1) (REF. In the event that ER stress cannot be resolved, the apoptotic pathway can be induced. Several models have been proposed to explain how ER stress is linked to apoptosis. The core principle of ERQC is that only properly folded proteins can be allowed to transit to their final destinations through the secretory pathway. What follows is less clear: how do proteins that pass an ERQC checkpoint find their way to specialized ER-exit sites for transport from the ER? Based on the rate of folding and the stability of a protein, there should be a way to predict whether a polypeptide will fold and transit properly, aggregate or be targeted for ERAD. However, protein folding is inherently error prone because the folding energy landscape for a polypeptide might include several off-pathway non-native intermediate states in addition to the state occupied by the native conformation3. However, protein folding is inherently error prone because the folding energy landscape for a polypeptide might include several off-pathway non-native intermediate states in addition to the state occupied by the native conformation3. Support for this model emerged from subsequent studies on the human cystic fibrosis transmembrane regulator (CFTR), a plasma membrane chloride channel that, when mutated, leads to cystic fibrosis14,15. However, based on the studies evaluated in this review, it should be obvious that the field has matured quickly. Nevertheless, many original questions remain unanswered. Overall, based on the pace at which new discoveries have been made, we suspect that even these questions can be answered in the coming years. Substrate recognition Substrate recognition Potential ERAD substrates include soluble and integral membrane proteins, polypeptides that have failed to become post-translationally modified or are otherwise damaged or misfolded, and unassembled members of multiprotein complexes. Potential ERAD substrates include soluble and integral membrane proteins, polypeptides that have failed to become post-translationally modified or are otherwise damaged or misfolded, and unassembled members of multiprotein complexes. Overall, it is better that questionable proteins in the ER are degraded because the cell cannot afford to risk the acquisition of toxic aggregates. The fundamental importance of BIP is emphasized by the observation that BIP-mutant knock-in mice show defects that are consistent with compromised ERQC and display profound defects in brain development37. For example, some substrates interact sequentially with BIP and calnexin–calreticulin in the cell47, whereas calnexin and BIP synergistically suppress the aggregation of a non-glycosylated substrate in vitro48. For example, some substrates interact sequentially with BIP and calnexin–calreticulin in the cell47, whereas calnexin and BIP synergistically suppress the aggregation of a non-glycosylated substrate in vitro48. For example, some substrates interact sequentially with BIP and calnexin–calreticulin in the cell47, whereas calnexin and BIP synergistically suppress the aggregation of a non-glycosylated substrate in vitro48. In some cases, the two chaperone systems even have unique effects on the fate of a substrate50-53. To prevent misfolding-induced toxicity, aberrant proteins are often destroyed4. Furthermore, budding yeast lack UGGT but exhibit most other aspects of glycoprotein quality control and ERAD. This process is catalysed by protein disulphide isomerases (PDIs), which possess thiol oxidoreductase activity (BOX 1). This process is catalysed by protein disulphide isomerases (PDIs), which possess thiol oxidoreductase activity (BOX 1). ERP57, a mammalian PDI homologue, associates with calnexin and calreticulin and is involved in glycoprotein quality control56. ERP57, a mammalian PDI homologue, associates with calnexin and calreticulin and is involved in glycoprotein quality control56. One recently characterized human PDI homologue, ERDJ5, contains four canonical thioredoxin-like active-site Cys-X-X-Cys motifs and is a BIP cofactor28. ERDJ5 regulates the degradation of null Hong Kong (NHK), a disease-causing α1-antitrypsin variant, by accelerating the formation of degradation-competent NHK monomers from disulphide-linked dimers58.Because of the diversity of this enzyme family and the diversity of potential substrates, many questions remain unanswered. Several classes of NEFs have been identified, including the Hsp110s, which belong to the Hsp70 superfamily, B-cell lymphoma-2-associated athanogenes (BAGs) and GRPE-like proteins (see the main text).Calnexin and calreticulin are carbohydrate-binding lectins that are required for the folding and quality control of glycosylated proteins. Several classes of NEFs have been identified, including the Hsp110s, which belong to the Hsp70 superfamily, B-cell lymphoma-2-associated athanogenes (BAGs) and GRPE-like proteins (see the main text).Calnexin and calreticulin are carbohydrate-binding lectins that are required for the folding and quality control of glycosylated proteins. 