Various inflammatory stimuli can trigger the activation of the IκB kinase (IKK) complex which consists of a regulatory subunit (IKKγ) and two catalytic subunits (IKKα and IKKβ) (4). Consistent with the elevated NF-κB activity in Panc-1 in MiaPaCa-2 cells, we also observe constitutive serine 536 phosphorylation of p65 (Fig. Importantly, we did not observe complete GSK-3 knock-down until 72 and 96 hours post siRNA transfection (Supplemental Fig. An increase in caspase-3 cleavage following 30μM pharmacologic GSK-3 inhibition was observed over 24 and 48 hours in Panc-1 (Fig. The efficiency of GSK-3 inhibition was indicated by the reduced basal phosphorylation of a GSK-3 substrate, glycogen synthase at serine 461 (Fig. Constitutive NF-κB activity in pancreatic cancer cells is IKK-dependentIn addition to the studies shown above relative to GSK-3, studies have also shown IKK to be essential in regulating constitutive NF-κB signaling in pancreatic cancer cells (8–10). Interestingly, knock-down of IKKα alone or combined IKKα/β knock-down caused significant loss of NF-κB DNA binding activity in Panc-1 cells (Fig. Interestingly, knock-down of IKKα alone or combined IKKα/β knock-down caused significant loss of NF-κB DNA binding activity in Panc-1 cells (Fig. Interestingly, knock-down of IKKα alone or combined IKKα/β knock-down caused significant loss of NF-κB DNA binding activity in Panc-1 cells (Fig. Interestingly, knock-down of IKKα alone or combined IKKα/β knock-down caused significant loss of NF-κB DNA binding activity in Panc-1 cells (Fig. Interestingly, knock-down of IKKα alone or combined IKKα/β knock-down caused significant loss of NF-κB DNA binding activity in Panc-1 cells (Fig. Interestingly, knock-down of IKKα alone or combined IKKα/β knock-down caused significant loss of NF-κB DNA binding activity in Panc-1 cells (Fig. However, the suppressive effect of IKKα and combined IKKα/β knock-down were stronger than IKKβ knock-down alone (Fig. Numerous reports have subsequently demonstrated involvement of this multifunctional kinase in regulating a variety of transcription factors involved in cancer progression, including NF-κB (13–18). Numerous reports have subsequently demonstrated involvement of this multifunctional kinase in regulating a variety of transcription factors involved in cancer progression, including NF-κB (13–18). Numerous reports have subsequently demonstrated involvement of this multifunctional kinase in regulating a variety of transcription factors involved in cancer progression, including NF-κB (13–18). A GSK-3β deficient mouse model provided the first evidence of GSK-3-dependent NF-κB regulation (19). A GSK-3β deficient mouse model provided the first evidence of GSK-3-dependent NF-κB regulation (19). GSK-3 inhibition reduced phosphorylation of GST-IκBα in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. Importantly, we show that complete knock-down of GSK-3 and significant growth suppression was not observed until later time-points post siRNA transfection (Supplemental Fig. In this report, we use an IKKβ-specific small molecule inhibitor (Compound A) that has been shown to be effective in blocking constitutive (27) and inducible (25) NF-κB activity in various cell lines. Moreover, our results emphasize the need for IKKα-specific small molecule inhibitors to target constitutive NF-κB activity in select pancreatic carcinoma cell types. Analysis from our group and others provide evidence that GSK-3β functions independent of the IKK complex during TNF-α-induced NF-κB signaling (19, 20, 28). We show that inhibition (AR-A014418) or knock-down of both GSK-3 isoforms suppressed constitutive IKK activity in Panc-1 cells (Fig. Notably, this abrogation in constitutive IKK activity correlated with reduced NF-κB activity, cell growth, and survival. Additionally, we provide the first evidence that links GSK-3 to constitutive IKK activity in pancreatic cancer cells. Additionally, we provide the first evidence that links GSK-3 to constitutive IKK activity in pancreatic cancer cells. Additionally, we provide the first evidence that links GSK-3 to constitutive IKK activity in pancreatic cancer cells. Additionally, we provide the first evidence that links GSK-3 to constitutive IKK activity in pancreatic cancer cells. Additionally, we provide the first evidence that links GSK-3 to constitutive IKK activity in pancreatic cancer cells. IKKα clone 14A231 and IKKβ clone10AG2 antibodies were purchased from Upstate Biotechnology (Lake Placid, NY). Small RNA interferenceThe following siRNA (siGenome SMARTpool) was obtained from Dharmacon (Layfayette, CO) as a pool of four annealed double-stranded RNA oligonucleotides: IKKα (M-003473-02), IKKβ (M-003503-03), GSK-3α (M-003009-01), GSK-3β (M-003010-03), and non-targeting control #3 (D001201-03). Dharmafect 1 transfection reagent (Layfayette, CO) was used to transfect 100nM siRNA according to manufacturer’s instruction. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) and NF-κB DNA binding ELISAEMSA and NF-κB super-shift analysis was performed on nuclear extracts as previously described (20) using 32P-labeled oligonucleotide probe corresponding to an NF-κB site within the MHC class I promoter region. Cytoplasmic extracts were prepared as previously described (23). Protein extracts were quantified by Bradford assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA) and analyzed by SDS-PAGE as previously described (20). Protein extracts were quantified by Bradford assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA) and analyzed by SDS-PAGE as previously described (20). Relative light units were measured on an Lmax Microplate Luminometer (Molecular Devices Corp., Sunnyvale, CA) and normalized to pRL-TK Renilla luciferase light units. Real-time PCR was performed and analyzed as previously described (20) using TaqMan Gene Expression Assay primer-probe sets (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) for IκBα (Hs00153283_m1) and Bcl-xL (Hs00236329_m1). Deregulated NF-κB and glycogen synthase kinase-3 signaling are among the many pathways that have been implicated in the pathogenesis of pancreatic cancer. Relative light units were measured on an Lmax Microplate Luminometer (Molecular Devices Corp., Sunnyvale, CA). Relative light units were measured on an Lmax Microplate Luminometer (Molecular Devices Corp., Sunnyvale, CA). GSK-3 isoforms regulate constitutive NF-κB activity in pancreatic cancer cellsA recent study emphasized the role GSK-3β plays in maintaining constitutive NF-κB reporter and target gene expression in pancreatic cancer cells (21). Treatment with either GSK-3 inhibitor for 24 hours at 15 and 25μM reduces p65/50 DNA binding in both cell lines (Fig. Treatment with either GSK-3 inhibitor for 24 hours at 15 and 25μM reduces p65/50 DNA binding in both cell lines (Fig. Treatment with either GSK-3 inhibitor for 24 hours at 15 and 25μM reduces p65/50 DNA binding in both cell lines (Fig. Loss of either GSK-3 isoform reduced constitutive NF-κB DNA binding in both cell lines (Fig. Loss of either GSK-3 isoform reduced constitutive NF-κB DNA binding in both cell lines (Fig. Loss of either GSK-3 isoform reduced constitutive NF-κB DNA binding in both cell lines (Fig. Loss of either GSK-3 isoform reduced constitutive NF-κB DNA binding in both cell lines (Fig. Our data show that knock-down of either GSK-3 isoform resulted in a significant reduction of constitutive NF-κB-luciferase reporter activity in Panc-1 and MiaPaCa-2 cells (Fig. Our data show that knock-down of either GSK-3 isoform resulted in a significant reduction of constitutive NF-κB-luciferase reporter activity in Panc-1 and MiaPaCa-2 cells (Fig. Our data show that knock-down of either GSK-3 isoform resulted in a significant reduction of constitutive NF-κB-luciferase reporter activity in Panc-1 and MiaPaCa-2 cells (Fig. Our data show that knock-down of either GSK-3 isoform resulted in a significant reduction of constitutive NF-κB-luciferase reporter activity in Panc-1 and MiaPaCa-2 cells (Fig. Next, we examined whether GSK-3-dependent regulation of reporter activity corresponded with the expression of two NF-κB-regulated genes (IκBα and Bcl-xL). Loss of GSK-3β alone and both GSK-3α/β significantly suppressed expression of Bcl-xL (Fig. 