The four electrode wires were then analyzed by scanning electron microscope coupled with electron dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM-EDS) to compare the morphology and elemental composition before and after exposure to NaSH solutions. Comparison of sulfur spectra presents a significant difference between samples 2 and 3. Comparison of sulfur spectra presents a significant difference between samples 2 and 3. Comparison of sulfur spectra presents a significant difference between samples 2 and 3. Comparison of sulfur spectra presents a significant difference between samples 2 and 3. However, sample 3 contains peaks at 168.2 eV and 169.2 eV, revealing the presence of Ag2(SO4) in addition to Ag2S. Taken together, this alternative sulfur speciation on the surface of the wire may explain loss in Ag/AgCl reference electrode functionality upon exposure to NaSH solution. These data suggested that the Ag/AgCl would not be useable for our potentiometric measurements for HS−, prompting us to develop an Ag2S coated electrode that was more stable to HS− solutions and could serve as a more robust reference electrode. 4.2.ChemFET preparationThe key feature of our HS− selective ChemFETs is the application of a hydrosulfide-selective polymer membrane, to the silicon nitride gate oxides of commercially available pH-sensitive FETs. ChemFETs often have chemically selective membranes comprised of PVC, PDMS, and occasionally NBR among other formulations [22,26–29]. Generally, the polymers alone have limited native sensitivity to ionic targets and their sensitivity/selectivity is be imparted by incorporating chemical recognition elements (CRE) into the polymer membranes to create the interfacial chemically selective material of the device.Tetraoctylammonium (TOA) was chosen as our CRE. NBR is also inert under the sample conditions and adheres to the gate oxide well enough to allow an operational lifetime of over 46 h. 4.3.Sensitivity and calibrationTo obtain a measurement signal from a ChemFET, an analog circuit must be used to interface with the FET and reference electrode [32]. 4.4.Response time and reversibilitySensor responses were recorded continuously for 300 s. As shown in Fig. 4.4.Response time and reversibilitySensor responses were recorded continuously for 300 s. As shown in Fig. 4.4.Response time and reversibilitySensor responses were recorded continuously for 300 s. As shown in Fig. As expected, when significant interference is observed, there is a corresponding increase in the effective detection limit (EDL). As expected, when significant interference is observed, there is a corresponding increase in the effective detection limit (EDL). As expected, when significant interference is observed, there is a corresponding increase in the effective detection limit (EDL). Interestingly, the few supramolecular hosts that are able to bind HS− often show similar binding constants for HS− and Cl−, presumably because both ions are of similar size, whereas our sensors show almost an order of magnitude preference for HS− over Cl− [34,35]. Interestingly, the few supramolecular hosts that are able to bind HS− often show similar binding constants for HS− and Cl−, presumably because both ions are of similar size, whereas our sensors show almost an order of magnitude preference for HS− over Cl− [34,35]. Potentiometric methods in particular have been poorly represented in environmental, petrochemical, and biological application spaces and provide an opportunity for continued development [12]. In optimized conditions, sensitivity and detection limit were found to be 53 mV per decade and 8 mM, respectively. H2S has a pKa near 7 and is primarily present as its conjugate base, hydrosulfide (HS−), at physiological temperature and pH. The ChemFETs described in this work feature a polymer membrane formulated with a non-covalently associated HS− ionophore. They provide detection of HS− in real-time with selectivity over sulfur-containing compounds including cysteine and glutathione, which are common interferants in H2S measurements. This environment includes several chemical and material interfaces each with an associated junction potential. When ideally constructed, the junction potential of the chemically selective material is the only variable, and therefore a change in Vcell and the corresponding change in VthCFET is due solely to the activity of the target ion. In practice, perfect selectivity is elusive and the relationship between Vcell, the activities of the analytical target (A), and the activity of a potential interferent (B) can be described by the Nikolsky-Eisenmann equation [20,23]. In practice, perfect selectivity is elusive and the relationship between Vcell, the activities of the analytical target (A), and the activity of a potential interferent (B) can be described by the Nikolsky-Eisenmann equation [20,23]. H2S is also found in natural gas and crude oil and is considered a contaminant in refined petroleum and gas products [1]. 3, 59 mV represents the maximum possible change in Vcell for each decade change in the activity of an ionic species having a charge of +1 or −1. 3.1.ReagentsSodium hydrosulfide (NaSH) was purchased from Strem Chemicals and stored in a nitrogen filled glovebox. Due to the toxicity and environmental prevalence of H2S (from both natural and unnatural sources) further development of environmental H2S sensing methods is needed [2]. Sulfide-sensitive membranes were made as follows: 0.1 wt% tetraoctylammonium (TOA) nitrate and 5 wt% NBR were dissolved in anisole. 3.3.Ag/Ag2S reference electrode fabricationAg/Ag2S wires were prepared by soaking silver wire (99.9%, 0.5 mm dia) in 5% ammonium sulfide solution overnight. H2S has also been established as an important small molecule biological mediator and is associated with different physiological conditions including diabetes, hypertension, neurodegeneration, and heart failure [3–8]. Reference potentials were found to be 129–146 mV vs SCE. 3.4.Electrode surface characterizationElemental composition and surface morphology were determined by scanning electron microscopy energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM-EDS) using a ThermoFisher Helios Hydra Plasma FIB. Additional elemental analysis was performed using Thermo Scientific ESCALAB 250 X-ray photoelectron spectrometry (XPS) system with an Al Kα monochromated source at 20 kV. The signal was recorded at a rate of 1 kHz. The signal was recorded at a rate of 1 kHz. Ag/AgCl REs were initially used to evaluate ChemFET performance, but we observed inconsistent RE function and drift during measurements. We hypothesized that the chloride on the Ag wire surface was being replaced with a sulfide species. 