Accumulating evidence also indicates the involvement of ROS in the toxic side effects of cisplatin including ototoxicity and nephrotoxicity [10–12]. Since hydrogen peroxide is a major source of hydroxyl radical, the lack of inhibitory effect of CAT on cisplatin-induced hydroxyl radical formation is somewhat surprising and suggests other unknown sources of hydroxyl radical. Sodium formate also inhibited the effect of cisplatin on Bax, whereas CAT had no significant effect and MnTBAP had variable effect. Sodium formate also inhibited the effect of cisplatin on Bax, whereas CAT had no significant effect and MnTBAP had variable effect. Sodium formate also inhibited the effect of cisplatin on Bax, whereas CAT had no significant effect and MnTBAP had variable effect. Effect of ROS generation and Bcl-2 expression on cisplatin-induced apoptosisAlthough a similar pattern of apoptosis was observed in HFDPC and HaCaT cells, the apoptotic response to cisplatin treatment in HFDPC cells was much lower than that in HaCaT cells (Fig. As ROS was earlier shown to be required for the induction of apoptosis by cisplatin, we tested the level of ROS generation in the two cell types after cisplatin treatment. Figure 8f shows that treatment of the cells with ferrous sulfate resulted in a substantial increase in ROS generation. Figure 8f shows that treatment of the cells with ferrous sulfate resulted in a substantial increase in ROS generation. Figure 8f shows that treatment of the cells with ferrous sulfate resulted in a substantial increase in ROS generation. Although hydrogen peroxide was previously shown to be a key mediator of apoptosis induced by cisplatin in human lung cancer cells [9], we did not observe the same effect in the dermal cell systems. The anti-apoptotic function of Bcl-2 is closely associated with its expression level, which is controlled by various mechanisms depending on the apoptotic stimuli [25, 26]. The keratinocyte HaCaT cells were substantially more responsive than the dermal papilla HFDPC cells, suggesting that keratinocytes are the major target of cisplatin toxicity in hair follicle cells. Because ROS are induced by various chemotherapeutic agents such as doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide and are associated with their toxic side effects [42, 43], our findings on the mechanisms of apoptosis regulation by ROS in the hair follicle cells could be important in the understanding of CIA by other drugs and in the development of novel therapeutic and preventive approaches for CIA. The coincidental decline of Bcl-2 level with an increase of Bax level was detected in hair matrix keratinocytes undergoing apoptosis. These findings have led to the hypothesis that ROS may function as a key mediator of cisplatin-induced apoptosis in hair follicle cells by regulating Bcl-2 and Bax levels. These findings have led to the hypothesis that ROS may function as a key mediator of cisplatin-induced apoptosis in hair follicle cells by regulating Bcl-2 and Bax levels. Hoechst 33342 and dihydrodichlorofluorescein diacetate (H2DCF-DA) were obtained from Molecular Probes, Inc. (Eugene, OR). The efficiency of transfection was determined by using a GFP reporter plasmid and was found to be approximately 85%. The efficiency of transfection was determined by using a GFP reporter plasmid and was found to be approximately 85%. The efficiency of transfection was determined by using a GFP reporter plasmid and was found to be approximately 85%. The mean fluorescence intensity was quantified by CellQuest software (Becton–Dickinson) analysis of the recorded histograms.Generation of highly reactive oxygen species (hROS) was determined according to the method previously described [30] using HPF as a probe. An Acquisit program (Bruker Instruments) was used for data acquisition and analysis. Approximately 1,000 nuclei from ten random fields were analyzed for each sample. Cell lysates were collected and determined for protein content using the Bradford method (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA). The transferred membranes were blocked for 1 h in 5% nonfat dry milk in TBST (25 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.4, 125 mM NaCl, 0.05% Tween 20) and incubated with appropriate primary antibodies at 4°C overnight. Membranes were washed twice with TBST for 10 min and incubated with horseradish peroxidase-coupled isotype-specific secondary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature. The immune complexes were detected by enhanced chemiluminescence detection system (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ) and quantified using analyst/PC densitometry software (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA). Despite such understanding, the mechanisms underlying the disease process remains obscure and effective preventive treatment has yet to be developed. The fluorescence signals were measured using a fluorescence microplate reader at the excitation and emission wavelengths of 488 and 520 nm, respectively. The lysates were collected and determined for protein content using the Bradford method (Bio-Rad Laboratories). Cell lysates (60 µg protein) were incubated with anti-Bcl-2 antibody at 4°C for 14 h, followed by incubation with protein G-conjugated agarose for 4 h at 4°C. The immune complexes were washed 6 times with cold lysis buffer and resuspended in 2× Laemmli sample buffer. The immune complexes were washed 6 times with cold lysis buffer and resuspended in 2× Laemmli sample buffer. The immune complexes were separated by 10% SDS-PAGE and analyzed by western blotting as described. Cisplatin (cis-diamminedichloroplatinum) is a commonly used chemotherapeutic agent for a variety of human cancers with a high potential to induce alopecia [4, 7]. Cisplatin induces apoptosis of HFDPC and keratinocytesCisplatin has been shown to induce hair loss under clinical applications [4, 7]. Cisplatin induces apoptosis of HFDPC and keratinocytesCisplatin has been shown to induce hair loss under clinical applications [4, 7]. Apoptosis assays show that cisplatin was able to induce apoptosis of both HFDPC and HaCaT cells and that this effect can be inhibited by co-treatment of the cells with antioxidants such as reduced glutathione (GSH) and NAC (Fig. Apoptosis assays show that cisplatin was able to induce apoptosis of both HFDPC and HaCaT cells and that this effect can be inhibited by co-treatment of the cells with antioxidants such as reduced glutathione (GSH) and NAC (Fig. Apoptosis assays show that cisplatin was able to induce apoptosis of both HFDPC and HaCaT cells and that this effect can be inhibited by co-treatment of the cells with antioxidants such as reduced glutathione (GSH) and NAC (Fig. Apoptosis assays show that cisplatin was able to induce apoptosis of both HFDPC and HaCaT cells and that this effect can be inhibited by co-treatment of the cells with antioxidants such as reduced glutathione (GSH) and NAC (Fig. Figure 2c and d shows representative results of the flow cytometry and microscopy experiments which support the generation of ROS in cisplatin-treated HFDPC and HaCaT cells. Analysis of ROS generation by flow cytometry also indicated that sodium formate inhibited the generation of ROS induced by cisplatin, whereas CAT and MnTBAP had no significant inhibitory effect (Fig. Analysis of ROS generation by flow cytometry also indicated that sodium formate inhibited the generation of ROS induced by cisplatin, whereas CAT and MnTBAP had no significant inhibitory effect (Fig. These results suggest that hydroxyl radical is a major ROS produced by the cells in response to cisplatin treatment and that this oxidative species plays a key role in apoptosis induced by cisplatin. First, HPF was used as a probe to detect highly reactive oxygen species in the presence or absence of hydroxyl radical scavenger sodium formate. First, HPF was used as a probe to detect highly reactive oxygen species in the presence or absence of hydroxyl radical scavenger sodium formate. 