These studies have shown adaptive characteristics of NK cells, with increased IFNƔ production upon re-exposure to cells with the same stimulus. The low IFNγ-production capacity reported in our experiments after stimulation with microbial stimuli is in line with earlier data in literature (12), which showed that NK cell production of IFNγ is obtained only by co-stimulation with a viral or mycobacterial stimulus and a stimulatory cytokine (IL2, IL12 or IL15 and IL18) (13-15). Considering the memory-like features of NK cells described in the literature and in this study, one could reasonably hypothesize that the differences in protection induced by BCG between SCID and NSG mice are due to the NK cells. An important observation of the present study is the long-term effect on NK cell function exerted by BCG vaccination. The process of trained immunity in monocytes is mediated by epigenetic regulation (1, 2), and similar processes have been reported to mediate at least some aspects of NK cell maturation and adaptive change (17). In conclusion, we demonstrate that BCG vaccination enhances the cytokine production by human NK cells after re-challenge with an unrelated microbial stimulus, a process earlier termed ‘trained immunity’. Non-specific effects of BCG vaccination are widely known in literature (18) and our results with NK cells may explain some of these non-specific protective effects of BCG. The study was approved by the Arnhem-Nijmegen Ethical Committee, and written informed consent was given by all the participants. Cytokine concentrations were assessed in the supernatants using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Cytokine measurementsCytokine measurements of TNFα, IL-1β, IL-6, IFNβ and IFNγ were performed in the supernatants using commercial ELISA kits from R&D Systems, MN, USA (TNFα and IL-1β) PBL assay science, Piscataway, USA (IFNβ) or Sanquin, Amsterdam, The Netherlands (IL-6 and IFNγ). The list mode data files were further analyzed using Kaluza™ software (Beckman Coulter). Cells were washed with PBS with 1% bovine serum albumin before being labelled with fluorochrome-conjugated mAbs. Two weeks later, mice were infected intravenously with a lethal dose of C. albicans blastoconidia (2×106 CFU/mouse). Statistical analysisDifferences were analyzed using the Wilcoxon signed rank test or Friedman test for paired samples. Otherwise stated, data are shown as cumulative results of level obtained in all volunteers (means + SEM). BCG does not change the proportion of NK cell subsetsIn a first set of experiments, we examined possible changes in NK cell subsets following BCG vaccination. The CD56brightCD16− NK cells dwell mainly in the lymph nodes tonsils; hence their number in our samples is too low to observe changes in activity and inhibitory cell markers.Significant changes were noted neither in the number and distribution of NK cell subsets following BCG vaccination (Table 1), nor in the mean fluorescence indexes of these markers (MFI; Table 2). BCG vaccination does not increase interferon-gamma production by NK cellsTwo weeks and three months after BCG vaccination, isolated monocytes displayed slightly increased IFNγ production in response to unrelated stimuli including S. aureus and C. albicans (Supplementary Figure 1), in accordance with previous observations (1). BCG enhances NK cell production of proinflammatory cytokinesBCG induces trained immunity in monocytes resulting in an increased production of proinflammatory cytokines (1). Indeed, NK cells isolated 2 weeks and 3 months after BCG vaccination produced more pro-inflammatory cytokines upon stimulation (Figure 2). BCG-induced protection against disseminated Candida albicans infection is partially NK cell dependentWe have previously demonstrated that BCG vaccination protects SCID mice, which lack functional T and B cells, against systemic lethal candidiasis (1). This protective effect was partially lost in NSG mice, suggesting a role for NK cells in the protection conferred by BCG (Figure 3). This effect, most profoundly seen with IL1β, lasts for at least three months, in contrast to classical non-specific activation of innate immunity, but is not accompanied by changes in NK cell subset distribution or expression of cell surface markers. These effects of BCG on NK-cells are biologically relevant, as we demonstrate a functional role for the trained NK cells in a murine model of lethal systemic candidiasis, in which the protection induced by BCG vaccination in SCID mice seems partially dependent on NK cells. Surprisingly, this improved response does not involve an increase of IFNγ production, which is described in literature as an important memory-like property of NK cells (4-7). Thirdly, hapten or viral antigens can induce liver-restricted memory NK cells with increased cytotoxicity, an effect that is dependent on CXCR6 (4, 11). 