Because the aim of this study is to examine the contributions of cofilin and Arp2/3 to barbed end generation and protrusion, we focused on the early phase of recruitment of these two proteins to the leading edge, the window of time in which the burst of barbed ends occurs. Because the aim of this study is to examine the contributions of cofilin and Arp2/3 to barbed end generation and protrusion, we focused on the early phase of recruitment of these two proteins to the leading edge, the window of time in which the burst of barbed ends occurs. Because the aim of this study is to examine the contributions of cofilin and Arp2/3 to barbed end generation and protrusion, we focused on the early phase of recruitment of these two proteins to the leading edge, the window of time in which the burst of barbed ends occurs. The Arp2/3 and cofilin pathways appear to be synergistic in vivoPrevious studies have shown that EGF-stimulated lamellipod protrusions are dependant on actin polymerization at the leading edge (Chan et al , 1998) and that both the Arp2/3 complex and cofilin appear to be significantly involved in the generation of free barbed ends for actin polymerization at the leading edge after EGF stimulation (Bailly et al , 2001; Zebda et al , 2001; Chan et al , 2000). However, the relative contributions of the Arp2/3 complex and cofilin have not been determined, nor has their role in generating free barbed ends been analyzed in live cells. First, to verify that the blocking antibodies were functional in these cells and that saturating amounts of antibody were injected, we conducted dose-response experiments (Fig. 2A-H,Q), they extended broad lamellipods rapidly within a few minutes (the area increase at 180 seconds is indicated in red in Fig. They also showed extensive GFP-βactin accumulation at the leading edge within 90 seconds after EGF addition (Fig. 2M-O) (Chan et al , 2000) extended broad lamellipods, nor did they show normal accumulation of GFP-βactin at the leading edge (Fig. The rate of GFP-βactin incorporation at the leading edge is proportional to free barbed end formation (Lorenz et al , 2004). Altogether, this supports the idea that cofilin and Arp2/3 are two main direct providers of free barbed ends after EGF stimulation. Altogether, this supports the idea that cofilin and Arp2/3 are two main direct providers of free barbed ends after EGF stimulation. Altogether, this supports the idea that cofilin and Arp2/3 are two main direct providers of free barbed ends after EGF stimulation. Also, the view that cofilin is merely a provider of actin monomers at the leading edge has been complicated by recent data showing an important role for cofilin in defining cell polarity (Dawe, 2003; Bailly and Jones, 2003) (Ghosh et al , 2004). However, there was a significant residual level of free barbed ends (30% of control, Fig. However, there was a significant residual level of free barbed ends (30% of control, Fig. However, there was a significant residual level of free barbed ends (30% of control, Fig. Stimulated control cells exhibited broad circumferential lamellipods, containing a characteristic dense actin network (Fig. 4A,C) (Bailly et al , 1999). 4A, consisting of a dense actin network, several micrometers thick, at the cell edge, that extends circumferentially along the entire perimeter of the cell. 4B,D) (Bailly et al , 1999). 4B,D) (Bailly et al , 1999). 4B,D) (Bailly et al , 1999). 4B,D) (Bailly et al , 1999). However, these cells never displayed the large, broad lamellipods of the control cells (Fig. Thus, this implicates cofilin’s severing activity in barbed end formation. Thus, this implicates cofilin’s severing activity in barbed end formation. Thus, this implicates cofilin’s severing activity in barbed end formation. However, the presence of both proteins together causes a much larger burst in actin polymerization than the sum of the individual contributions, indicating synergy between the two proteins (Ichetovkin et al , 2002). However, the presence of both proteins together causes a much larger burst in actin polymerization than the sum of the individual contributions, indicating synergy between the two proteins (Ichetovkin et al , 2002). Also, the sum of these contributions was much less than the amount of barbed ends generated in control cells in which both cofilin and Arp2/3 were active, again suggesting synergy between the two. Also, the sum of these contributions was much less than the amount of barbed ends generated in control cells in which both cofilin and Arp2/3 were active, again suggesting synergy between the two. Also, the sum of these contributions was much less than the amount of barbed ends generated in control cells in which both cofilin and Arp2/3 were active, again suggesting synergy between the two. This branching would be biased towards the barbed end of elongating filaments, as shown in vitro (Pantaloni et al , 2000; Ichetovkin et al , 2002), an ideal geometry for pushing against the membrane. This branching would be biased towards the barbed end of elongating filaments, as shown in vitro (Pantaloni et al , 2000; Ichetovkin et al , 2002), an ideal geometry for pushing against the membrane. This branching would be biased towards the barbed end of elongating filaments, as shown in vitro (Pantaloni et al , 2000; Ichetovkin et al , 2002), an ideal geometry for pushing against the membrane. This branching would be biased towards the barbed end of elongating filaments, as shown in vitro (Pantaloni et al , 2000; Ichetovkin et al , 2002), an ideal geometry for pushing against the membrane. Thus, the incidence angle can be used as an indicator of the formation of a normal dendritic structure in the lamellipod. Thus, the incidence angle can be used as an indicator of the formation of a normal dendritic structure in the lamellipod. Thus, the incidence angle can be used as an indicator of the formation of a normal dendritic structure in the lamellipod. Thus, the incidence angle can be used as an indicator of the formation of a normal dendritic structure in the lamellipod. Thus, the incidence angle can be used as an indicator of the formation of a normal dendritic structure in the lamellipod. Blocking Arp2/3 activity, however, significantly but only partially reduced the number of free barbed ends generated after stimulation (Bailly et al , 2001). This model is supported by experiments in which local cofilin activation by uncaging was sufficient to initiate protrusion and define the location and direction of protrusion in vivo (Ghosh et al , 2004) and by experiments showing evidence that the actin-filament-severing activity of cofilin is crucial for protrusions such as growth cones and neurite extensions (Endo et al , 2003).In this model, the filaments newly polymerized from cofilin-generated barbed ends are ATP-rich filaments that promote the nucleation and branching activity of the Arp2/3 complex. Our work here stresses the importance of cofilin as a direct provider of free barbed ends in cells. Our work here stresses the importance of cofilin as a direct provider of free barbed ends in cells. It is clear that to generate a successful protrusion, one needs both free barbed ends and a proper geometrical organization of the actin network. It is clear that to generate a successful protrusion, one needs both free barbed ends and a proper geometrical organization of the actin network. It is clear that to generate a successful protrusion, one needs both free barbed ends and a proper geometrical organization of the actin network. It is clear that to generate a successful protrusion, one needs both free barbed ends and a proper geometrical organization of the actin network. It is clear that to generate a successful protrusion, one needs both free barbed ends and a proper geometrical organization of the actin network. Despite these results supporting the hypothesis that cofilin may be the major provider of free barbed ends after growth factor stimulation (Condeelis, 2001), we were concerned that they might not reflect the in vivo situation completely accurately. Despite these results supporting the hypothesis that cofilin may be the major provider of free barbed ends after growth factor stimulation (Condeelis, 2001), we were concerned that they might not reflect the in vivo situation completely accurately. Despite these results supporting the hypothesis that cofilin may be the major provider of free barbed ends after growth factor stimulation (Condeelis, 2001), we were concerned that they might not reflect the in vivo situation completely accurately. This rate is directly proportional to the number of barbed ends formed, thus this assay allows a relative barbed end measurement in live cells. This rate is directly proportional to the number of barbed ends formed, thus this assay allows a relative barbed end measurement in live cells. This rate is directly proportional to the number of barbed ends formed, thus this assay allows a relative barbed end measurement in live cells. We have used this method here to examine the relative contributions of the Arp2/3 complex and cofilin to barbed end formation in vivo. We propose thereafter a model for stimulated protrusion that incorporates our new data on the interaction between Arp2/3 and cofilin, and we discuss its relationship to the classic dendritic model of protrusion (Pollard and Borisy, 2003). Before EGF stimulation, cells were starved for 3 hours in Leibovitz’s L15 medium (Gibco) containing 0.35% BSA. Before EGF stimulation, cells were starved for 3 hours in Leibovitz’s L15 medium (Gibco) containing 0.35% BSA. In each case, IgG fractions were isolated using T-Gel (Pierce). For the EM studies, 5 nm gold conjugated goat anti-biotin antibodies were purchased from Ted Pella. For the EM studies, 5 nm gold conjugated goat anti-biotin antibodies were purchased from Ted Pella. Later events, such as the traction of the cell body in the direction of protrusion, are thought to be mediated by myosin motors (Lee et al , 1993; Lauffenburger and Horwitz, 1996; Svitkina and Borisy, 1999; Svitkina et al , 1997). Later events, such as the traction of the cell body in the direction of protrusion, are thought to be mediated by myosin motors (Lee et al , 1993; Lauffenburger and Horwitz, 1996; Svitkina and Borisy, 1999; Svitkina et al , 1997). Images were taken every 10 seconds with constant exposure times. Both a heated stage and an objective heater were used at 37°C. Images were captured below the saturation level of the camera. The mean fluorescence intensity of each cell was measured by linearly converting digitized image using NIH image (program developed by the National Institute of Health, available on the internet) and analyzing the images in the same program. Cells were grouped according to their mean fluorescent intensity into four groups of increasing intensity for further analysis. The cell area in each image is supplied by the macro. Images were recorded on a Zeiss Axiovert 100M equipped with a 63× Plan Apochromat 1.4 NA objective, a temperature control chamber, and driven by the OpenLab software (Improvision). Electron microscopyMTLn3 cells were grown on 5 mm glass coverslips, starved and microinjected with antibody and biotin-actin. After recovery time and stimulation with EGF, they were permeabilized and processed for rapid freeze/freeze dry/rotary shadow as previously described (Bailly et al , 1999). After recovery time and stimulation with EGF, they were permeabilized and processed for rapid freeze/freeze dry/rotary shadow as previously described (Bailly et al , 1999). After recovery time and stimulation with EGF, they were permeabilized and processed for rapid freeze/freeze dry/rotary shadow as previously described (Bailly et al , 1999). After recovery time and stimulation with EGF, they were permeabilized and processed for rapid freeze/freeze dry/rotary shadow as previously described (Bailly et al , 1999). Coverslips were mounted on a rapid freezing apparatus (CF100; Life Cell Corp.) and frozen by slamming them into a liquid-nitrogen-cooled copper block. Filament lengths were assessed as previously described (Bailly et al , 1999). the ones that would be directly abutting the membrane). 