Substance use and misuse is common among adolescents; a nationally representative survey found that 49 percent of 12th graders reported lifetime use of any illicit drug and about 30 percent used illicit substances in the previous year (Johnston, O’Malley, Miech, Bachman, & Schulenberg, 2015). These included foster care agencies, residential treatment facilities, detention centers, and homeless youth shelters as part of a county-wide effort to collect adolescent health data. These included foster care agencies, residential treatment facilities, detention centers, and homeless youth shelters as part of a county-wide effort to collect adolescent health data. Hope variableHopefulness was assessed via previously validated questions including “I am excited about my future”, “I expect good things to happen to me”, and “I trust my future will turn out well” (Lippman et al , 2014). Hope variableHopefulness was assessed via previously validated questions including “I am excited about my future”, “I expect good things to happen to me”, and “I trust my future will turn out well” (Lippman et al , 2014). Hope variableHopefulness was assessed via previously validated questions including “I am excited about my future”, “I expect good things to happen to me”, and “I trust my future will turn out well” (Lippman et al , 2014). We summed the three questions to create a Hope Score (HS) that ranged from 3 (low hopefulness) to 15 (high hopefulness) (Lippman et al , 2014), which was dichotomized as low versus moderate-to-high. Next, we identified and included covariates that had significant relationships (p < .05) with both the outcome and predictor variables. All analyses were conducted using Stata 13.1. Those reporting low hope were more likely to be male (68%), more likely to endorse past year homelessness (60%), and more likely to be Non-Hispanic Black (53%) than those reporting moderate-to-high HS (Table 2). Many of the youth in our sample endorsed substance use; 63% ever used marijuana, 40% youth reported marijuana use in last 30 days, 24% reported ever using hard drugs, 51% reported daily tobacco use, and 25% reported heavy episodic alcohol use. Those with higher HS were less likely to endorse heavy episodic drinking, daily tobacco use, recent or lifetime marijuana use, and having sex after using substances (p = <.05). Those with higher HS continued to have a 52% decreased odds of lifetime marijuana use with adjustments for appropriate covariates (AOR 0.48, p = .050) (included age, depression symptoms, and homelessness). Youth who had high hope were also marginally less likely to have sex after substance use (AOR 0.481, p = .065). None of the other substance use behaviors remained associated with higher HS in these adjusted models (Table 3). It is possible that the sample size was too small to detect significant associations. Hope is described as a central element of successful treatment related to behavior change (Glassman, Kottsieper, Zuckoff, & Gosch, 2013; Koehn, O’Neill, & Sherry, 2012; Larsen & Stege, 2010a, 2010b). The study was not powered to assess these associations and the lack of statistical significance may reflect the relatively small sample size. 