For example, in depressed subjects, treatment with drugs that target either serotonergic or noradrenergic neurotransmission may be equally efficacious at distal time points, but they differ in the initial response time and in the pattern of behavioral improvement (Katz et al  2004). The lack of a significant effect (t=1.83, df= 10, p=0.097) is likely due to insufficient statistical power from the use of small sample sizes. The lack of a significant effect (t=1.83, df= 10, p=0.097) is likely due to insufficient statistical power from the use of small sample sizes. The lack of a significant effect (t=1.83, df= 10, p=0.097) is likely due to insufficient statistical power from the use of small sample sizes. The lack of a significant effect (t=1.83, df= 10, p=0.097) is likely due to insufficient statistical power from the use of small sample sizes. The lack of a significant effect (t=1.83, df= 10, p=0.097) is likely due to insufficient statistical power from the use of small sample sizes. The lack of a significant effect (t=1.83, df= 10, p=0.097) is likely due to insufficient statistical power from the use of small sample sizes. Effect of antidepressants on FR-2 shuttle box escape deficitsTo determine if antidepressants could reverse the shuttle box escape deficit induced by a single IS session, and to compare the effects of two different pharmacological classes of antidepressants, animals were administered SAL, DMI (24 mg/kg/day) or FLX (5 mg/kg/day) for 6 days after IS, and subsequently subjected to a shuttle box test session (experiment 3). No difference was detected between the control and re-exposure + FLX groups averaged over test sessions (p>0.05). Consequently, additional models that reproduce both the pattern of behavioral changes and the temporal course observed clinically may allow for improved characterization of the therapeutically relevant neuroplastic changes associated with chronic exposure to distinct pharmacological classes (Katz et al  2006). The series of stressors in the CUS procedure did not include electrical shocks, exposures to shock grids or to the IS context. An additional procedural variable that interferes with operant escape responding in the rat is a large discrepancy between the intensity of shocks used during training and subsequent escape testing (Rosellini et al  1978). An additional procedural variable that interferes with operant escape responding in the rat is a large discrepancy between the intensity of shocks used during training and subsequent escape testing (Rosellini et al  1978). This finding is consistent with previous reports of prolonged escape deficits when the IS apparatus and shuttle box share contextual cues (Hunziker and Dos Santos 2007; Maier and Watkins 2005; Ruedi-Bettschen et al  2004; Zazpe et al  2007). This finding is consistent with previous reports of prolonged escape deficits when the IS apparatus and shuttle box share contextual cues (Hunziker and Dos Santos 2007; Maier and Watkins 2005; Ruedi-Bettschen et al  2004; Zazpe et al  2007). Again, we observed significantly improved performance in both groups of FLX-treated animals across repeated shuttle box test sessions. Again, we observed significantly improved performance in both groups of FLX-treated animals across repeated shuttle box test sessions. Again, we observed significantly improved performance in both groups of FLX-treated animals across repeated shuttle box test sessions. Indeed, brief, periodic re-exposures of experimental animals to the IS context can extend the duration of a shuttle box escape deficit from 2 to 46 days, and perhaps indefinitely (Maier 2001). Because it has previously been shown that the 5HT1A agonist 8-OH-DPAT both blocked the development of and reversed FR-2 shuttle box escape deficits when IS was performed in a context different from the shuttle box, but had no effect when IS was administered in the shuttle box used for testing (Maier and Watkins 2005), it is tempting to speculate that the differential activity of FLX on our IS and CUS-induced escape deficit is due to a contextual fear effect. However, this study used an FR-1 escape contingency that may be especially sensitive to simple respondent, unconditioned behavior (running when shocked) masking the potential interactions between drug, stress-induced deficits in operant learning, and conditioned fear (Bolles and Bolles 1970; Hunziker and Dos Santos 2007; Maier et al  1973). minimal contextual fear conditioning). These findings, combined with the absence of an effect of CTP in our model using doses that are behaviorally active in other stress paradigms (Overstreet et al  2004; Papp et al  2002), supports the possibility that the strong effect of DMI and the absence of an effect of FLX and CTP at the first shuttle box test session is not a dose response limitation, but reflects differential neural modulation by noradrenergic and serotonergic antidepressants. Importantly, in this study, contextual fear processing was likely to be present during escape testing, as the only attribute that differed between the IS and testing contexts was the gray-scale intensity of the sidewalls (white vs. gray). Importantly, in this study, contextual fear processing was likely to be present during escape testing, as the only attribute that differed between the IS and testing contexts was the gray-scale intensity of the sidewalls (white vs. gray). Importantly, in this study, contextual fear processing was likely to be present during escape testing, as the only attribute that differed between the IS and testing contexts was the gray-scale intensity of the sidewalls (white vs. gray). Importantly, in this study, contextual fear processing was likely to be present during escape testing, as the only attribute that differed between the IS and testing contexts was the gray-scale intensity of the sidewalls (white vs. gray). For example, in clinically depressed subjects, DMI has a faster initial onset of therapeutic effects and selectively on motor retardation, as compared to the slower initial effect of the SSRI paroxetine on anxiety measures (Katz et al  2004; 2006). For example, in clinically depressed subjects, DMI has a faster initial onset of therapeutic effects and selectively on motor retardation, as compared to the slower initial effect of the SSRI paroxetine on anxiety measures (Katz et al  2004; 2006). For example, in clinically depressed subjects, DMI has a faster initial onset of therapeutic effects and selectively on motor retardation, as compared to the slower initial effect of the SSRI paroxetine on anxiety measures (Katz et al  2004; 2006). For example, in clinically depressed subjects, DMI has a faster initial onset of therapeutic effects and selectively on motor retardation, as compared to the slower initial effect of the SSRI paroxetine on anxiety measures (Katz et al  2004; 2006). For example, in clinically depressed subjects, DMI has a faster initial onset of therapeutic effects and selectively on motor retardation, as compared to the slower initial effect of the SSRI paroxetine on anxiety measures (Katz et al  2004; 2006). For example, in clinically depressed subjects, DMI has a faster initial onset of therapeutic effects and selectively on motor retardation, as compared to the slower initial effect of the SSRI paroxetine on anxiety measures (Katz et al  2004; 2006). For example, in clinically depressed subjects, DMI has a faster initial onset of therapeutic effects and selectively on motor retardation, as compared to the slower initial effect of the SSRI paroxetine on anxiety measures (Katz et al  2004; 2006). This approach may be particularly relevant for assessing the behavioral and cellular mechanisms underlying the ineffectiveness of SSRI’s in treatment refractory conditions and help guide the development of novel treatments based on selective pharmacological targeting of different symptom clusters within stress-induced psychiatric disorders (Frazer and Morilak 2005). To assess whether the experimental endpoint in our IS-shuttle box procedure was pharmacologically dissociable, we compared the behavioral effect of desipramine (DMI), a tricyclic antidepressant with selectivity for blocking norepinephrine reuptake, with that of the serotonin-selective reuptake inhibitors (SSRI’s) fluoxetine (FLX) and citalopram (CTP). To assess whether the experimental endpoint in our IS-shuttle box procedure was pharmacologically dissociable, we compared the behavioral effect of desipramine (DMI), a tricyclic antidepressant with selectivity for blocking norepinephrine reuptake, with that of the serotonin-selective reuptake inhibitors (SSRI’s) fluoxetine (FLX) and citalopram (CTP). Animals were allowed 7–10 days to habituate to housing conditions before experiments began. Animals were pair-housed in suspended, wire bottom cages under a 12/12-h light–dark cycle with continuous access to food and water in a temperature (25°C) and humidity controlled environment. The provision of food required sliding open the cages to refill stainless steel slotted troughs. Routine cage maintenance consisted of removing trays that collected debris filtering through the cage floor. Routine cage maintenance consisted of removing trays that collected debris filtering through the cage floor. Therefore, animals were rarely handled at times other than those of direct involvement with various components of experimental procedures. The shuttle boxes were situated in sound-attenuating boxes equipped with a fan for ventilation and noise masking. Each chamber consisted of plexiglass walls and a metal grid floor with a grid spacing of 1.5 cm. The average duration of each shock was 15 s (range, 5–25 s) with an average inter-trial interval of 45 s (range, 30–60 s). The average duration of each shock was 15 s (range, 5–25 s) with an average inter-trial interval of 45 s (range, 30–60 s). The average duration of each shock was 15 s (range, 5–25 s) with an average inter-trial interval of 45 s (range, 30–60 s). The average duration of each shock was 15 s (range, 5–25 s) with an average inter-trial interval of 45 s (range, 30–60 s). The average duration of each shock was 15 s (range, 5–25 s) with an average inter-trial interval of 45 s (range, 30–60 s). Shuttle box testingThe shuttle box sessions were run by a PC computer with custom software developed for the system (Med Associates, VT, USA). Shuttle box testingThe shuttle box sessions were run by a PC computer with custom software developed for the system (Med Associates, VT, USA). Crosses were automatically scored by the PC whenever a micro-switch was activated by tilting of the pivoted grid floor after a crossing event. In the CTP experiment, animals were subjected to a single IS session and randomly assigned to four groups receiving six consecutive, twice daily, injections of either SAL or of three different doses of CTP (1, 2.5 and 5 mg/kg/injection). In the CTP experiment, animals were subjected to a single IS session and randomly assigned to four groups receiving six consecutive, twice daily, injections of either SAL or of three different doses of CTP (1, 2.5 and 5 mg/kg/injection). In the CTP experiment, animals were subjected to a single IS session and randomly assigned to four groups receiving six consecutive, twice daily, injections of either SAL or of three different doses of CTP (1, 2.5 and 5 mg/kg/injection). 3).Experiment 4To assess the duration of the shuttle box escape deficit induced by a single IS session, rats were randomly assigned to three groups that were tested at either 6, 12 or 21 days after the initial IS session (n=7–8 per group, Fig. Commonly used preclinical procedures, such as learned helplessness (LH) and the forced swim test (FST), generally fail to model this ‘therapeutic lag’ and may not be suitable for characterizing the delayed molecular and cellular alterations in neural plasticity associated with chronic drug treatment (Frazer and Morilak 2005). Rats received 21 days of once daily injections of either SAL or FLX (5 mg/kg/injection) starting 24 h after the IS session. Rats received 21 days of once daily injections of either SAL or FLX (5 mg/kg/injection) starting 24 h after the IS session. Rats received 21 days of once daily injections of either SAL or FLX (5 mg/kg/injection) starting 24 h after the IS session. For experiments with two groups, the primary analysis consisted of an unpaired Student’s t-test. A secondary analysis consisted of linear trend assessments across shuttle box test sessions. A secondary analysis consisted of linear trend assessments across shuttle box test sessions. 