Fatty acids serve as substrates and mediators of prostaglandin synthesis and steroidogenesis and, therefore, are crucial to reproductive processes.1 Depending on molecular structure, fatty acids are classified as saturated fatty acids (SFAs), monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs), and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs). Fatty acids serve as substrates and mediators of prostaglandin synthesis and steroidogenesis and, therefore, are crucial to reproductive processes.1 Depending on molecular structure, fatty acids are classified as saturated fatty acids (SFAs), monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs), and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs). Fatty acids serve as substrates and mediators of prostaglandin synthesis and steroidogenesis and, therefore, are crucial to reproductive processes.1 Depending on molecular structure, fatty acids are classified as saturated fatty acids (SFAs), monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs), and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs). The majority of blood specimens collected preconception were nonfasting in our study population (14.5% of women were fasting at the time of blood sample collection). Although the half-life of n-3 fatty acids is generally longer than a standard fasting period as it ranges from 1.6 to 2.3 days in plasma phospholipids,38 there is a possibility that the half-lives of other individual fatty acids vary and are subsequently reflected in our measurement by increased variability. Although the half-life of n-3 fatty acids is generally longer than a standard fasting period as it ranges from 1.6 to 2.3 days in plasma phospholipids,38 there is a possibility that the half-lives of other individual fatty acids vary and are subsequently reflected in our measurement by increased variability. However, their impact on composite fatty acids was negligible as their levels were very low (Table 2) and the subanalysis excluding those five fatty acids did not alter results. However, their impact on composite fatty acids was negligible as their levels were very low (Table 2) and the subanalysis excluding those five fatty acids did not alter results. The use of preconception fatty acids determined in plasma phospholipids among women who were attempting pregnancy enabled us to address a potential link between physiologic status of specific fatty acids and both pregnancy and pregnancy outcomes. Plasma measurements are less susceptible to error compared with dietary fatty acid assessment, although direct translation of our results to dietary fatty acids is not possible. The detailed study protocol is reported elsewhere.10 Briefly, participants were followed for up to six menstrual cycles and throughout pregnancy for those who became pregnant. The detailed study protocol is reported elsewhere.10 Briefly, participants were followed for up to six menstrual cycles and throughout pregnancy for those who became pregnant. The detailed study protocol is reported elsewhere.10 Briefly, participants were followed for up to six menstrual cycles and throughout pregnancy for those who became pregnant. Individual fatty acids were expressed as a percent of total fatty acids. The carbon atom possessing the first double bond from the omega (methyl) end of the fatty acid chain is denoted by n (e.g., n-3) and its cis-trans isomeric configuration is denoted by c or t. We classified 27 individual fatty acids based on common chemical structure and properties and created composite variables of fatty acids, such as total SFA, total MUFA, and total PUFA (eTable 1; http://links.lww.com/EDE/B563). Urine human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) testing was performed on daily first-morning urine samples collected on the last 10 days of each woman’s first and second cycles of study participation and on spot urine samples collected at all end-of-cycle visits. Height and weight were measured at baseline to calculate BMI (kg/m2). We used multiple imputation model (PROC MI) with fully conditional specification method to impute missing plasma fatty acids and covariates (e.g., BMI, 1.6%; alcohol, 1.3%; physical activity, 0.1%; income, 0.1%; vitamin use, 1.5%; total cholesterol concentrations, 1.7%) in five imputed data sets, with PROC MIANALYZE to combine the results. The imputed data sets were used during the multivariable analysis.We used log-binomial regression models to examine associations between plasma fatty acids and pregnancy, live birth, and pregnancy loss and estimate relative risks (RR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI). Individual and composite variables of plasma fatty acids were evaluated as continuous variables (per 1% change in total plasma fatty acids). We set the correlation between the unmeasured confounder and plasma fatty acids to vary from ρ = 0 to 0.8, based on previous literature which reported correlations between 0.41 to 0.58.21–23 We additionally investigated the impact of excluding plasma fatty acids with CVs >20% from the composite variables on the overall results. In Table 2, the distribution of plasma phospholipid fatty acids is presented by BMI. We found that adjustment for unmeasured confounding factors with several different effect estimates with live birth (β from −0.7 to 0.7, corresponding to RRs of 0.5–2.0) and correlations with fatty acids (ρ = 0 to ρ = 0.8) did not produce importantly different results from the models unadjusted for unmeasured confounding factors. Excluding the five plasma fatty acids with CVs >20% from the composite measures of SFA, MUFA, and PUFA did not alter the results for pregnancy, pregnancy loss, and live birth. We found that certain preconception plasma phospholipid fatty acids were associated with live birth among women who had experienced one or two previous pregnancy losses. Therefore, we investigated associations between preconception plasma fatty acid status and pregnancy outcomes, including pregnancy, pregnancy loss, and live birth among women with prior pregnancy loss, a group that may be particularly amenable to potential lifestyle changes to improve their fertility. These results, though perhaps unexpected, collectively suggest the importance of plasma phospholipid fatty acid profile in relation to pregnancy outcomes. These results, though perhaps unexpected, collectively suggest the importance of plasma phospholipid fatty acid profile in relation to pregnancy outcomes. As plasma phospholipid fatty acid status is not entirely due to dietary intake, it is possible that our observations could have been in part due to confounding by complex metabolic pathways that lead to altered fatty acid metabolism and subsequently affect pregnancy outcomes. These fatty acids are known for their proinflammatory properties30 and for mediating cell inflammation.31 Therefore, our results may reflect the vulnerability of PUFAs, and n-6 fatty acids in particular, to lipid peroxidation and the proinflammatory role of the corresponding peroxidation products, which could possibly increase oxidative stress,8 alter lipid metabolism, disturb reproductive hormones,32 and subsequently affect fertility. 