Similarly, Technetium 99m sulfur colloid1 and fluorescein13 labeled irrigations have also been used as tracers to visualize the distribution of sinus irrigations. Similarly, Technetium 99m sulfur colloid1 and fluorescein13 labeled irrigations have also been used as tracers to visualize the distribution of sinus irrigations. Similarly, Technetium 99m sulfur colloid1 and fluorescein13 labeled irrigations have also been used as tracers to visualize the distribution of sinus irrigations. Similarly, Technetium 99m sulfur colloid1 and fluorescein13 labeled irrigations have also been used as tracers to visualize the distribution of sinus irrigations. CFD technique has been widely utilized in the past in field of Rhinology to simulate nasal airflow15–17, heat exchange18, aerosols19 and volatile chemical dispersion20–22, and this study represent the first attempt to extend CFD technique to the investigation of nasal irrigation. Preoperative and postoperative CFD models of sinus irrigations were created based upon preoperative and postoperative computed tomography (CT) maxillofacial scans from a 47 year-old male patient with chronic rhinosinusitis who had undergone revision endoscopic sinus surgery of all eight sinuses. The nasal mucosal wall was assumed to be immobile and smooth. The nasal mucosal wall was assumed to be immobile and smooth. The advection scheme and turbulence Numerics were both set at “high resolution”. The simulation applied a transient scheme with second order backward Euler to capture the full fluid motion during the irrigation, with an initial time step set at 5e−6s and the adaptive time steps set based on the target optimal number of iteration loops (3–5), and minimum and maximum time step (1e−6s – 0.01s). The CFD model presented in this study provides a number of benefits over previously used methods to evaluate distribution of sinonasal irrigations. One significant advantage of the CFD model is that it can predict not only the final destination of irrigations, but also demonstrates the dynamic flow of irrigations as they traverse the sinonasal cavities. This provides a more accurate depiction and understanding of topical irrigation distribution, rather than evaluating whether irrigation penetrates a given sinus as an all-or-none phenomenon. Draf II) may potentially prevent such adverse outcome, pending future studies with more cases and more validations. This counter-intuitive outcome can be explained by the fact that the preoperative maxillary ostium diameter in our model is measured at 2.9 mm, towards the narrow end of spectrum10, thus it takes time for fluid to drain into the maxillary sinus (see snapshots from t=1s to t=5s in Figure 4). But as we discussed above, the removal of superior and intersinus septums in Draf III had the adverse effect that prevented the irrigation fluid from reaching the maxillary ostium, thus the maxillary irrigations were significantly reduced. Harvey et al3 reported that the frontal sinus irrigation improved greatest postoperatively, and Singhal et al11 reported that frontal sinus irrigation remain similar between the head position of 45° and 90° (they called it 0°), which both match our results. Harvey et al3 reported that the frontal sinus irrigation improved greatest postoperatively, and Singhal et al11 reported that frontal sinus irrigation remain similar between the head position of 45° and 90° (they called it 0°), which both match our results. Harvey et al3 reported that the frontal sinus irrigation improved greatest postoperatively, and Singhal et al11 reported that frontal sinus irrigation remain similar between the head position of 45° and 90° (they called it 0°), which both match our results. The 45° head position results also demonstrated the complexity in predicting irrigation outcome: compared to 90° position, less maxillary and ethmoid sinus penetration preoperatively, but more maxillary sinus penetration postoperatively (see Figure 5). For the preoperatively case, 45° position would tilt the nasopharynx lower than ethmoid and part of the maxillary sinuses compared to 90° position, thus preventing fluid rising to these locations. On the other hand, CT-based CFD model needs also to be further validated. On the other hand, CT-based CFD model needs also to be further validated. 