After the U87 tumor cells were cultured in collagen hydrogels for seven days, the weight of collagen in the hydrogel decreased (Figure 4). After the U87 tumor cells were cultured in collagen hydrogels for seven days, the weight of collagen in the hydrogel decreased (Figure 4). After the U87 tumor cells were cultured in collagen hydrogels for seven days, the weight of collagen in the hydrogel decreased (Figure 4). After the U87 tumor cells were cultured in collagen hydrogels for seven days, the weight of collagen in the hydrogel decreased (Figure 4). After the U87 tumor cells were cultured in collagen hydrogels for seven days, the weight of collagen in the hydrogel decreased (Figure 4). After the U87 tumor cells were cultured in collagen hydrogels for seven days, the weight of collagen in the hydrogel decreased (Figure 4). In the normal brain, the ECM contains high levels of glycosaminoglycan (GAG) hyaluronan, and proteoglycans (PGs), and low levels of fibrous proteins such as collagens, fibronectin, and laminin (Ruoslahti, 1996; Zimmermann and Dours-Zimmermann, 2008). Investigation of gene expression of tumor cells in hydrogelsThe expression of uPA and MMP9 of U87 and A172 glioma cells in non-crosslinked collagen hydrogel was significantly higher than that of cells on the culture dish or in crosslinked collagen hydrogel (p < 0.01). The expression of tPA of U87 glioma cells in non-crosslinked collagen hydrogel was significantly higher than that of cells on the culture dish (p < 0.05). Investigation of regulation of tumor cell migration in collagen hydrogelA pharmacological approach was used to investigate the effect of MMP-2, MMP-9, and plasminogen activators on tumor cell migration (Figure 8). Fibrous proteins are the major components of basement membranes of the brain’s vasculature system (Berczi and Szentiványi, 2009). The generated microtumors using the ECM are a valued model for studying the role of 3D cell-cell and cell-ECM interactions. Glioma cells can respond to the stiffness of the substrate and show decreased stress fiber formation, focal adhesion, and cell motility when they are cultured on a soft substrate compared to a rigid material (Ulrich et al , 2009). Glioma cells can respond to the stiffness of the substrate and show decreased stress fiber formation, focal adhesion, and cell motility when they are cultured on a soft substrate compared to a rigid material (Ulrich et al , 2009). It was reported that the invasion rate of glioma cells was enhanced when they were grown in collagen matrices with a higher collagen concentration because of the higher stiffness of the matrices (Kaufman et al , 2005). When the uPA gene expression was downregulated in glioma cells, the tumor cell motility decreased. When the uPA gene expression was downregulated in glioma cells, the tumor cell motility decreased. When the uPA gene expression was downregulated in glioma cells, the tumor cell motility decreased. When the uPA gene expression was downregulated in glioma cells, the tumor cell motility decreased. When the uPA gene expression was downregulated in glioma cells, the tumor cell motility decreased. When the uPA gene expression was downregulated in glioma cells, the tumor cell motility decreased. The PI3k/Akt signaling pathway was inhibited when uPA was downregulated. The PI3k/Akt signaling pathway was inhibited when uPA was downregulated. The PI3k/Akt signaling pathway was inhibited when uPA was downregulated. An in vivo study showed that treatment of tranexamic acid to male C57BL/6 mice resulted in a significant reduction of ischemia-reperfusion-elicited intravascular firm adherence and transmigration of neutrophils (Reichel et al , 2011). Collagen, a type of natural biomaterial, is one component of the glioblastoma ECM. Collagen, a type of natural biomaterial, is one component of the glioblastoma ECM. The gene expression level of these molecules varies in response to different extracellular microenvironments (Egeblad et al , 2010; Kessenbrock et al , 2010). In this study, we observed higher MMP-2, MMP-9, tPA, and uPA expression of U87 and A172 glioma cells in non-crosslinked collagen hydrogels compared with that of cells grown on culture dishes or in crosslinked collagen hydrogels. Results indicate that these molecules play an important role in the proteolytic movement of U87 and A172 glioma cells in collagen hydrogels. Results indicate that these molecules play an important role in the proteolytic movement of U87 and A172 glioma cells in collagen hydrogels. Results indicate that these molecules play an important role in the proteolytic movement of U87 and A172 glioma cells in collagen hydrogels. We also observed a lower MMP-9 expression in crosslinked collagen hydrogels, which is consistent with previous observations that reported a decreased MMP-9 expression in stiffer hydrogels (Pedron and Harley, 2013; Wang et al , 2014a). We also observed a lower MMP-9 expression in crosslinked collagen hydrogels, which is consistent with previous observations that reported a decreased MMP-9 expression in stiffer hydrogels (Pedron and Harley, 2013; Wang et al , 2014a). We also observed a lower MMP-9 expression in crosslinked collagen hydrogels, which is consistent with previous observations that reported a decreased MMP-9 expression in stiffer hydrogels (Pedron and Harley, 2013; Wang et al , 2014a). In this study, the inhibitors of MMP-2, MMP-9, uPA, and tPA did not inhibit A172 cell migration, and uPA and tPA did not inhibit U87 cell migration on the culture dish. In this study, the inhibitors of MMP-2, MMP-9, uPA, and tPA did not inhibit A172 cell migration, and uPA and tPA did not inhibit U87 cell migration on the culture dish. In this study, the inhibitors of MMP-2, MMP-9, uPA, and tPA did not inhibit A172 cell migration, and uPA and tPA did not inhibit U87 cell migration on the culture dish. In this study, the inhibitors of MMP-2, MMP-9, uPA, and tPA did not inhibit A172 cell migration, and uPA and tPA did not inhibit U87 cell migration on the culture dish. A number of signaling pathways facilitate the invasion of a glioblastoma. MMPs are proteolytic endopeptidases responsible for cancer progression. Previous studies showed that MMP-2 and MMP-9 regulate cellular proliferation, motility, invasion, and angiogenesis of glioblastomas (Lei et al , 2015; Musumeci et al , 2015; Rao, 2003; Song et al , 2009; Tabouret et al , 2013). A previous study showed that the downregulation of urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) in cultured glioma cells inhibited the PI3k/Akt signaling pathway, thereby inhibiting cell migration (Chandrasekar et al , 2003). Glioblastoma research has typically been based on tumor cells on cell culture dishes. Glioblastoma research has typically been based on tumor cells on cell culture dishes. Glioblastoma research has typically been based on tumor cells on cell culture dishes. Glioblastoma research has typically been based on tumor cells on cell culture dishes. Parallel-plate geometry (50 mm diameter) at 0.9 mm gap height was used on a 3000 µL crosslinked and non-crosslinked collagen hydrogel concentration after 24 hours of gelation. Parallel-plate geometry (50 mm diameter) at 0.9 mm gap height was used on a 3000 µL crosslinked and non-crosslinked collagen hydrogel concentration after 24 hours of gelation. Parallel-plate geometry (50 mm diameter) at 0.9 mm gap height was used on a 3000 µL crosslinked and non-crosslinked collagen hydrogel concentration after 24 hours of gelation. Parallel-plate geometry (50 mm diameter) at 0.9 mm gap height was used on a 3000 µL crosslinked and non-crosslinked collagen hydrogel concentration after 24 hours of gelation. Parallel-plate geometry (50 mm diameter) at 0.9 mm gap height was used on a 3000 µL crosslinked and non-crosslinked collagen hydrogel concentration after 24 hours of gelation. Parallel-plate geometry (50 mm diameter) at 0.9 mm gap height was used on a 3000 µL crosslinked and non-crosslinked collagen hydrogel concentration after 24 hours of gelation. Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR)The qRT-PCR technique was performed to study the gene expression of MMP-2, MMP-9, uPA, tissue plasminogen activator (tPA), and PAI in tumor cells grown in collagen hydrogels. The cDNA was generated using a High-Capacity cDNA Reverse Transcription Kit (Life Technologies Corporation, Grand Island, NY). Power SYBR® Master Mix was used to perform the qRT-PCR using the Applied Biosystems™ QuantStudio 3 Real-Time PCR System (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA). Primers used in the qRT-PCR procedure are listed in Table 1. The concentration of MMP-2 inhibitor, MMP-9 inhibitor, tranexamic acid, and aprotinin in the cell culture medium or in the collagen hydrogels was 100 µM, 25 µM, 3 mM, and 40 µg/ml, respectively. The size of these microtumors decreased significantly after they were cultured for 3 days. Biomaterial scaffolds now show promise in forming three-dimensional (3D) cancer models for in vitro and in vivo studies. Biomaterial scaffolds now show promise in forming three-dimensional (3D) cancer models for in vitro and in vivo studies. Biomaterial scaffolds now show promise in forming three-dimensional (3D) cancer models for in vitro and in vivo studies. The reduction value increased to 43.5 ± 0.9% and 42.8 ± 0.4% (p < 0.01), respectively, after culturing for 7 days. 