Lewis et al [4] showed that ferric citrate is effective, increased iron stores and decreased IV iron and ESA usage (a yearly savings of ~$2,000 / patient) compared to standard phosphate binders. Lewis et al [4] showed that ferric citrate is effective, increased iron stores and decreased IV iron and ESA usage (a yearly savings of ~$2,000 / patient) compared to standard phosphate binders. Van Ballegoigen et al [8] found that associations of 25(OH)D with BMD were strongest among White and Chinese participants and null among Black and Hispanic participants. Further studies are needed to determine optimal vitamin D measurements for bone health in all ethnic groups, as management of 25(OH)D in non-white patients with CKD is not clear at this time.A number of clinical trials examined the putative role of vitamin D repletion and are summarized in Table 1. In contrast to serum phosphate, FGF23 levels do not vary within individuals during the day or with short-term variations in dietary intake. Rebholz et al [19] found that baseline elevation of FGF23 was associated with a 5-fold increased risk of ESRD, independent of baseline kidney function and hyperphosphatemia. In 2009, the KDIGO guidelines suggested maintenance of phosphorus and calcium in the normal range and serum PTH in the range of 2–9 times the upper limit of normal. In 2009, the KDIGO guidelines suggested maintenance of phosphorus and calcium in the normal range and serum PTH in the range of 2–9 times the upper limit of normal. In a prospective study of ~6300 European dialysis patients, Fernandez-Martin et al [24] found that serum phosphate, calcium and PTH were all associated with increased mortality with a U shaped curve. Compared with PTH 150–300 pg/mL, all-cause mortality was higher for PTH 301–450 pg/mL and > 600 pg/mL, with PTH > 600 also associated with increased risk of cardiovascular mortality and cardiovascular hospitalizations. Compared with PTH 150–300 pg/mL, all-cause mortality was higher for PTH 301–450 pg/mL and > 600 pg/mL, with PTH > 600 also associated with increased risk of cardiovascular mortality and cardiovascular hospitalizations. However, in a pre-specified age based subgroup analysis of the EVOLVE trial, Parfrey et al [27] reported a reduced risk of death and major cardiovascular events in older (age > 65), but not younger, dialysis patients on cinacalcet. Komaba et al [33] reported a 34% and 41% lower risk for 1 year all-cause and cardiovascular mortality, respectively, following parathyroidectomy in ~4500 Japanese dialysis patients. Haarhaus et al [42] report that increased levels of the bALP isoform B1x (exclusively found in patients with CKD) are diagnostic of biopsy proven low bone turnover, while elevated levels of bALP and PTH levels are suggestive of non-low bone turnover. DKK1 and sclerostin (a Wnt inhibitor) [43] may be additional biomarkers for CKD-MBD, but widespread use of bALP isoform B1x, DKK1, and sclerostin is currently limited by assay availability and reliability.Behets et al [44] characterized bone histology after treatment with cinacalcet in dialysis patients with biopsy proven high turnover bone disease, noting improvement in bone formation and biochemical markers. A number of therapeutic agents for management of bone disease now exist including anabolic (teriparatide, romosozumab) or antiresorptive (bisphosphonates, denosumab) drugs, though limited data exist on the antifracture efficacy (and sometimes safety) of these agents in CKD populations. Palcu et al [45] reported safe use of teriparatide over 24 months in a single dialysis patient with improvement in pain, bone biopsy and BMD. In a retrospective study of 13 patients with CKD4–5 treated with denosumab, Dave et al [46] identified severe hypocalcemia in 8/13 patients. Both of these studies were observational and small, but suggest that denosumab might be safe to use in dialysis patients with aggressive repletion of calcium and vitamin D. Finally, the sclerostin inhibitor romosozumab is an exciting new agent that improved bone mineral density via both bone formation and decreased bone resorption over 12 months in post-menopausal women, though utility in patients with CKD is unknown [48]. As past discoveries resulted in the re-branding of the field (CKD-MBD), the current multitude of inter-related factors in CKD-MBD requires novel investigative methodologies. Instead of focusing on the perturbation of one or two substrates (which often leads to unwanted alterations of other related parameters), future studies will need to measure all of these molecules simultaneously and likely intervene on multiple pathways to produce a desired clinical effect. It is assumed that reduced phosphate intake will benefit CKD and ESRD patients equally, though Selamet et al [1] found no relationship between 24-hour urine phosphate excretion (a surrogate for oral phosphate intake) and all cause mortality in pre-dialysis patients, suggesting that phosphate intake is not directly linked to serum phosphate levels as it is in dialysis patients. 