Of note, recruitment in Australia was aimed to be the general population, while recruitment in the U.S. was aimed to be representative of minority ethnic groups [15]. Of note, recruitment in Australia was aimed to be the general population, while recruitment in the U.S. was aimed to be representative of minority ethnic groups [15]. These differences in ethnic groups, age and recruitment approach likely contributes to the differences in MCS finding of two countries. These differences in ethnic groups, age and recruitment approach likely contributes to the differences in MCS finding of two countries. These differences in ethnic groups, age and recruitment approach likely contributes to the differences in MCS finding of two countries. Australia and the U.S.) in our study is unclear. Australia and the U.S.) in our study is unclear. Australia and the U.S.) in our study is unclear. Australia and the U.S.) in our study is unclear. Australia and the U.S.) in our study is unclear. Australia and the U.S.) in our study is unclear. QoL is generally referred to a measure of wellbeing which reflects the positive aspects of an individual’s life including life satisfaction, good health and a sense of meaning which cannot be identified by laboratory tests [5, 6]. There was no strong imbalance in the total sample (56% women), but was more imbalanced in the U.S. sample (67% women). The SF-12 used in our study is a self-reported subjective measure. The SF-12 used in our study is a self-reported subjective measure. Moreover, our baseline HRQoL was assessed completely independently to the outcome of all-cause mortality (i.e. Moreover, our baseline HRQoL was assessed completely independently to the outcome of all-cause mortality (i.e. > 10,000 older people or national sample) [10] and the majority of these (n = 5) had a strong gender imbalance (i.e. Therefore, accounting for the reliable and valid data of sociodemographic factors, health-related behaviours and some clinical measures based on medical records rather than self-reporting in our adjusted Cox-proportional hazards models was another strength of this study. Clinical implicationsOur sample of community-dwelling older people initially free of known major life-limiting diseases is unique as it represents relatively healthy older individuals who will be increasingly seen in primary health settings with an aging population. Our unique study identified that even among relatively healthy older adults, higher physical HRQoL predicts lower mortality risk. < 4.2% representation of one gender) while others had a very short follow-up period from 1 to 2.5 years [10]. Furthermore, given that mortality risk varies by gender [13] and women often have lower HRQoL than men [14], it is important to understand the association between HRQoL and mortality by gender. The ASPREE inclusion criteria were initially healthy individuals aged ≥ 70 years, or aged ≥ 65 years for U.S. minority (i.e. ASPREE was approved by multiple Institutional Review Boards in Australia and the U.S. ASPREE was approved by multiple Institutional Review Boards in Australia and the U.S. ASPREE was approved by multiple Institutional Review Boards in Australia and the U.S. Determinant: health-related quality of lifeHRQoL was assessed using the validated Medical Outcomes Study 12-item short form (SF-12) (version-2) questionnaire [18]. Outcome: mortalityAll-cause mortality was defined as any cause of death that occurred in trial participants after their enrolment in the study but before June 12, 2017, confirmed by two independent sources. Outcome: mortalityAll-cause mortality was defined as any cause of death that occurred in trial participants after their enrolment in the study but before June 12, 2017, confirmed by two independent sources. Outcome: mortalityAll-cause mortality was defined as any cause of death that occurred in trial participants after their enrolment in the study but before June 12, 2017, confirmed by two independent sources. Outcome: mortalityAll-cause mortality was defined as any cause of death that occurred in trial participants after their enrolment in the study but before June 12, 2017, confirmed by two independent sources. Outcome: mortalityAll-cause mortality was defined as any cause of death that occurred in trial participants after their enrolment in the study but before June 12, 2017, confirmed by two independent sources. Outcome: mortalityAll-cause mortality was defined as any cause of death that occurred in trial participants after their enrolment in the study but before June 12, 2017, confirmed by two independent sources. All deaths were confirmed by two independent sources, such as family members, primary care physician or public death notice. All deaths were confirmed by two independent sources, such as family members, primary care physician or public death notice. All deaths were confirmed by two independent sources, such as family members, primary care physician or public death notice. Additionally, in Australia, the vital status was checked and verified on a weekly basis through the Ryerson Index, a community-maintained on-line index of Australian death notices [21]. CovariatesBaseline variables were considered as covariates based on previous studies [10, 22, 23] and whether they were associated with both HRQoL (either PCS or MCS) and mortality in the study cohort. CovariatesBaseline variables were considered as covariates based on previous studies [10, 22, 23] and whether they were associated with both HRQoL (either PCS or MCS) and mortality in the study cohort. CovariatesBaseline variables were considered as covariates based on previous studies [10, 22, 23] and whether they were associated with both HRQoL (either PCS or MCS) and mortality in the study cohort. Alcohol intake in any day was analysed as (a) never/former, (b) current with 1–2 standard drinks, or (c) current with 3 + standard drinks. Physical capacity was the longest amount of time walking outside home without any rest in the last 2 weeks was assessed and defined as (a) none, (b) ≤ 15 min, (c) 16–30 min, or (d) > 30 min). The clinical measures collected using interviews and/or clinical examination included personal cancer history (yes/no); hypertension (yes/no based on whether the participants were using treatment for high blood pressure or whether the average of three blood pressure measurements was above the normal range i.e. Additionally, body mass index (BMI) was calculated by dividing weight in kilograms by height in meters squared and then analysed as (a) underweight (BMI: less than 18.5), (b) normal weight (BMI: 18.5 to 24.9), (c) overweight (BMI: 25 to 29.9), or (d) obese (BMI: 30 or more) [24]. Additionally, body mass index (BMI) was calculated by dividing weight in kilograms by height in meters squared and then analysed as (a) underweight (BMI: less than 18.5), (b) normal weight (BMI: 18.5 to 24.9), (c) overweight (BMI: 25 to 29.9), or (d) obese (BMI: 30 or more) [24]. Statistical analysisChi-square test, t-test and Wilcoxon rank-sum test were used to identify PCS, MCS, sociodemographic, health-related behaviours and clinical measures differences by survival status. The hazards ratios were estimated for every 10-unit increase in PCS/MCS.The multivariable models adjusted for age, gender, education, living situation, smoking, alcohol, longest amount of time walking outside home without any rest, cancer history, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, BMI, and 3MS. The interaction terms between PCS/MCS and gender (men and women) or country (Australia and the U.S.) were fitted in the multivariable Cox models to test the heterogeneity of these associations (p-value for interaction). There was no heterogeneity of the effects in the association between PCS and all-cause mortality according to country or gender (p-values for interaction 0.38 and 0.13, respectively) (Table 2 and Supplementary Table S3). There was no heterogeneity of the effects in the association between PCS and all-cause mortality according to country or gender (p-values for interaction 0.38 and 0.13, respectively) (Table 2 and Supplementary Table S3). There was no heterogeneity of the effects in the association between PCS and all-cause mortality according to country or gender (p-values for interaction 0.38 and 0.13, respectively) (Table 2 and Supplementary Table S3). 