After 12h, uPA activity was further increased and uPA activity reached saturation point at 24h. After 12h, uPA activity was further increased and uPA activity reached saturation point at 24h. Inhibition of the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway increased the phosphorylation status of ERK1/2, which is consistent with previous studies (25). However, uPA expression was not significantly inhibited after pI3K/AKT blockade (Fig. However, uPA expression was not significantly inhibited after pI3K/AKT blockade (Fig. Taken together, these results indicate that radiation-induced uPA expression is mediated by the ERK1/2 and p38 signaling pathways, and partially through the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway. Taken together, these results indicate that radiation-induced uPA expression is mediated by the ERK1/2 and p38 signaling pathways, and partially through the PI3K/AKT signaling pathway. Subsequently, several signaling pathways, such as MEK1/2/ERK1/2 and PI3K/AKT, enhance their activity and regulate cell survival, growth and other properties of tumor cells (5). Subsequently, several signaling pathways, such as MEK1/2/ERK1/2 and PI3K/AKT, enhance their activity and regulate cell survival, growth and other properties of tumor cells (5). Collectively, the results indicate that radiation-induced uPA expression is mediated via the EGFR/MEK/ERK and EGFR/MEK/p38 pathways in the IOMM-Lee meningioma cell line. In addition, cell lysates of pu2-transfected IOMM-Lee cells showed significant reduction of uPAR expression levels (Fig. In addition, cell lysates of pu2-transfected IOMM-Lee cells showed significant reduction of uPAR expression levels (Fig. We noticed that radiation at a dose of 10Gy significantly enhanced spheroid migration by approximately 65% compared to the non-irradiated controls (Figs. However, transfection with puPA and pu2 significantly inhibited migration by 79.66 and 80.47%, respectively as compared with the mock and pSV controls (Fig. However, transfection with puPA and pu2 significantly inhibited migration by 79.66 and 80.47%, respectively as compared with the mock and pSV controls (Fig. To facilitate the comparison of the relative invasiveness between irradiated and non-irradiated cells, all values were normalized to the percentage invasion of mock control cells, which was taken as 100% (Fig. Some studies also highlight the potential of radiated cells to induce a more prominent angiogenic effect and implicate the same proteolytic enzymes in this procedure (6,7). Some studies also highlight the potential of radiated cells to induce a more prominent angiogenic effect and implicate the same proteolytic enzymes in this procedure (6,7). Radiation treatment enhanced capillary-like network formation by 30%, whereas pre-treatment of tumor cells with puPA and pu2 significantly blocked the angiogenic process as compared to the tumor conditioned medium from irradiated and non-irradiated mock and pSV-transfected IOMM-Lee cells (Figs. In contrast, siRNA treatment specifically inhibited the expression of uPA and uPAR in vivo (Fig. In contrast, siRNA treatment specifically inhibited the expression of uPA and uPAR in vivo (Fig. Radiation is widely used for the treatment of meningiomas even after gross total resection and especially after subtotal excision (2,3). Our results show that siRNA against uPA and uPAR inhibited invasion and tumor-induced angiogenesis of irradiated IOMM-Lee cells, and also suppressed tumor growth in vivo. This protein phosphorylation was inhibited by pre-treatment with each specific inhibitor in IOMM-Lee cells (Fig. This protein phosphorylation was inhibited by pre-treatment with each specific inhibitor in IOMM-Lee cells (Fig. These results confirm that radiation-induced uPA expression is mediated through the EGFR/p38 and EGFR/ERK-dependent MAP kinase pathways. These results confirm that radiation-induced uPA expression is mediated through the EGFR/p38 and EGFR/ERK-dependent MAP kinase pathways. These results confirm that radiation-induced uPA expression is mediated through the EGFR/p38 and EGFR/ERK-dependent MAP kinase pathways. In addition, studies have shown that sublethal doses of radiation promote migration and invasiveness in glioma cell line (28). In addition, studies have shown that sublethal doses of radiation promote migration and invasiveness in glioma cell line (28). In addition, studies have shown that sublethal doses of radiation promote migration and invasiveness in glioma cell line (28). In addition, studies have shown that sublethal doses of radiation promote migration and invasiveness in glioma cell line (28). In the present study, as shown by western blotting and zymography, transient transfection with pu2 decreased endogenous levels of uPAR expression and uPA activity in IOMM-Lee cells, with or without radiation. In the present study, as shown by western blotting and zymography, transient transfection with pu2 decreased endogenous levels of uPAR expression and uPA activity in IOMM-Lee cells, with or without radiation. Our result suggested that the downregulation of both uPA and uPAR is more effective in inhibiting migration, invasion and angiogenesis than the downregulation of either of the molecules alone. Our result suggested that the downregulation of both uPA and uPAR is more effective in inhibiting migration, invasion and angiogenesis than the downregulation of either of the molecules alone. Our result suggested that the downregulation of both uPA and uPAR is more effective in inhibiting migration, invasion and angiogenesis than the downregulation of either of the molecules alone. These results confirm our previous studies in which uPA and uPAR downregulation inhibited invasion, migration, angiogenesis and survival in different cancer cells (17-19,38-41). Immunoreactivity of CD31, an endothelial cell marker, was reduced in tumor xenografts treated with either puPA or pu2, indicating a reduction of tumor angiogenesis. Immunoreactivity of CD31, an endothelial cell marker, was reduced in tumor xenografts treated with either puPA or pu2, indicating a reduction of tumor angiogenesis. Our results indicate that radiation increases uPA levels and activity through EGFR, ERK1/2 and p38 signaling molecules and, to a lesser extent, through pI3K/AKT. Radiation treatment enhanced invasion, migration and angiogenesis, whereas treatment with siRNA against uPA and uPAR decreased the radiation-induced aggressive properties of IOMM-Lee cells and inhibited tumor growth in vivo. Specific inhibitors of EGFR (AG1478), MEK1/2 (U0126), p38 (SB203580), c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) (SP600125), phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) (LY294002), and AKT (AKT inhibitor IV) (Calbiochem, San Diego, CA) were diluted and used as per the manufacturer's instructions. The majority of these tumors are benign, and rarely present with histological or clinical features that suggest aggressive potential (2). After the indicated hours of incubation in conditioned medium, 20μL of MTT reagent were added to the cells, followed by another 4h of incubation at 37°C. Both benign and malignant meningiomas are treated with surgical excision, with the goal of gross total resection. The PCR conditions were as follows: 95°C for 5 min, followed by 35 cycles of 95°C for 1 min, 55°C for 1 min, and 72°C for 1 min. Equal amounts of protein samples (0.5μg) were resolved on 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gel containing plasminogen and fibrinogen, and stained as described previously (17). Cells were collected and lysed in RIPA buffer [50 mmol/mL Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 150mmol/mL NaCl, 1% IGPAL, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS] containing 1mM sodium orthovanadate, 0.5mM PMSF, 10μg/mL aprotinin, 10μg/mL leupeptin and resolved on SDS-PAGE. After overnight transfer onto a PVDF membrane, the blot was blocked with 6% nonfat dry milk in PBS and 0.1% Tween-20. Comparable loading of proteins on the gel was verified by re-probing the blots with an antibody specific for the housekeeping gene product, GAPDH. Spheroid migrationMulticellular IOMM-Lee spheroids were cultured in 96-well ultra low attachment plates. Spheroid migrationMulticellular IOMM-Lee spheroids were cultured in 96-well ultra low attachment plates. Twelve hours after transfection, the spheroids were radiated with 10Gy, transferred to 8-well chamber slides, and allowed to grow for another 24h. Twelve hours after transfection, the spheroids were radiated with 10Gy, transferred to 8-well chamber slides, and allowed to grow for another 24h. Twelve hours after transfection, the spheroids were radiated with 10Gy, transferred to 8-well chamber slides, and allowed to grow for another 24h. Twelve hours after transfection, the spheroids were radiated with 10Gy, transferred to 8-well chamber slides, and allowed to grow for another 24h. Twelve hours after transfection, the spheroids were radiated with 10Gy, transferred to 8-well chamber slides, and allowed to grow for another 24h. Cells were allowed to migrate through the matrigel for 24h. HMEC-1 were incubated overnight and the formation of the microtubule networks was examined using a phase-contrast microscope equipped with a CC camera and evaluated by Discovery Image Pro software. Single-fraction radio-surgery could also be the primary treatment for dural-based tumors without rapid growth. Control animals were injected with PBS only (Mock). Control animals were injected with PBS only (Mock). Subcutaneous tumor growth was measured every 3 days with vernier calipers. Mice were euthanized when the tumor diameter in control mice measured between 11 and 12 mm. Statistical analysisAll data are presented as means ± standard errors (SE) of at least three independent experiments, each performed at least in triplicate. Statistical analysisAll data are presented as means ± standard errors (SE) of at least three independent experiments, each performed at least in triplicate. 