Furthermore, exciting examples of RNA-mediated non-Mendelian genetic effects will be discussed, along with their possible implications for the study of evolution and immunology. Furthermore, exciting examples of RNA-mediated non-Mendelian genetic effects will be discussed, along with their possible implications for the study of evolution and immunology. One group suggested that small RNAs, which are bound by different Argonaute proteins, serve as epigenetic memories of “self” and “nonself” RNAs. One group suggested that small RNAs, which are bound by different Argonaute proteins, serve as epigenetic memories of “self” and “nonself” RNAs. On the contrary, the discoveries of genome protective and transgenerationally transmitted small RNAs stand on solid ground - previous research efforts have unequivocally demonstrated that small RNAs are heritable, and provided insights into the different mechanisms that contribute to the persistency of RNAi. While a myriad of examples exists for the involvement of inherited small RNAs in defending the genome from threats that come from the “outside” (genomic parasites), it is very possible that transgenerationally-transmitted regulatory RNAs play other “in house” roles as well. While a myriad of examples exists for the involvement of inherited small RNAs in defending the genome from threats that come from the “outside” (genomic parasites), it is very possible that transgenerationally-transmitted regulatory RNAs play other “in house” roles as well. While a myriad of examples exists for the involvement of inherited small RNAs in defending the genome from threats that come from the “outside” (genomic parasites), it is very possible that transgenerationally-transmitted regulatory RNAs play other “in house” roles as well. While a myriad of examples exists for the involvement of inherited small RNAs in defending the genome from threats that come from the “outside” (genomic parasites), it is very possible that transgenerationally-transmitted regulatory RNAs play other “in house” roles as well. Thus it is possible that the principles that enable heritable acquired immune resistance contribute to the evolution of many additional traits. Furthermore, these small RNAs possess unique qualities that promote a long-lasting, and even transgenerational influence: their nuclear activity, their ability to become amplified through the action of RNA Dependent RNA Polymerases (RdRPs) and their ability to undergo stabilizing post-transcriptional modifications (Figure. Another incredible quality of small RNAs that expands their potential to serve as transgenerational carriers of somatically-acquired traits, is the movement of certain regulatory RNA molecules between different cells and tissues [11]. Since the formulation of the Modern Synthesis the theory holds that the environment is limited in its contribution to the evolutionary course of action – it affects selection, but not the degree of variation [1,2]. Stable RNAi-mediated methylation of DNA cannot explain inheritance seen in worms, since in C.elegans cytosine methylation does not seem to occur [20] suggesting alternative RNAi inheritance mechanisms are utilized as well. Recent evidence in worms suggests, however, that RNAi inheritance can involve a nuclear RNAi mechanism and chromatin remodeling genes as well [22]. RNAi inheritance maintained by chromatin remodeling factors (HDA-4, K03D10.3, ISW-1 and MRG-1 [22]) was shown to persist almost indefinitely (>80 generations) in the absence of the original trigger [22]. How can heritable small RNAs persist over many generations? How can heritable small RNAs persist over many generations? How can heritable small RNAs persist over many generations? Each nematode produces hundreds of progeny, and therefore small RNAs must be amplified to overcome the transgenerational dilution effect that expands logarithmically. Moreover, HRDE-1 is found in oocytes nuclei but not in differentiated sperm nuclei [27], although RNAi is most efficiently transmitted via sperm [17]. RNAi mutants, but not wild type worms, were shown to be susceptible to artificial viral replication [31–33], and recently RNAi-dependency was proven essential for resistance against a natural virus (the Orsay virus) as well [34]. Recent experiments suggest that C.elegans worms which are infected with the natural Orsay virus also develop RNAi-based protection which is accumulated over generations, so that the progeny of the infected worms is essentially immuned (Personal communication [37]). Recent experiments suggest that C.elegans worms which are infected with the natural Orsay virus also develop RNAi-based protection which is accumulated over generations, so that the progeny of the infected worms is essentially immuned (Personal communication [37]). piRNA amplification is achieved by different mechanisms in different organisms. Over the years, controversy surrounded the study of environmentally affected transgenerational inheritance. While piRNAs are involved in many inherited immunity effects, they are obviously not central to all such mechanisms. Manipulation of transgenerational immunitySmall RNA-based surveillance cannot eliminate all the genetic parasites, since some mobile elements utilize different techniques to overcome, or even manipulate RNAi, to escape inherited immunity. Manipulation of transgenerational immunitySmall RNA-based surveillance cannot eliminate all the genetic parasites, since some mobile elements utilize different techniques to overcome, or even manipulate RNAi, to escape inherited immunity. A clue to the mechanism might be found in Drosophila, where in cells such integration was shown to be achieved by the reverse transcriptase activity of transposons, resulting in establishment of an anti-viral RNAi response [57]. In summary, it appears that inherited small RNAs are involved in multiple regulatory pathways central to immunity, across the tree of life. In summary, it appears that inherited small RNAs are involved in multiple regulatory pathways central to immunity, across the tree of life. In summary, it appears that inherited small RNAs are involved in multiple regulatory pathways central to immunity, across the tree of life. In summary, it appears that inherited small RNAs are involved in multiple regulatory pathways central to immunity, across the tree of life. In general, there are two ways to use prior infections to protect the progeny: the organism can either make a heritable “black list” of all the foreign genes that its ancestors encountered, which must be suppressed, or prepare a “guest list” of all the familial self genes that need be to expressed. In general, there are two ways to use prior infections to protect the progeny: the organism can either make a heritable “black list” of all the foreign genes that its ancestors encountered, which must be suppressed, or prepare a “guest list” of all the familial self genes that need be to expressed. In general, there are two ways to use prior infections to protect the progeny: the organism can either make a heritable “black list” of all the foreign genes that its ancestors encountered, which must be suppressed, or prepare a “guest list” of all the familial self genes that need be to expressed. Black list: Inherited VaccinesAn important strategy for identifying parasitic elements is to take advantage of the virus’s or the transposons’s need to replicate and mobilize between cells or between different parts of the genome [43]. In Drosophila germ cells specific genomic loci act as “traps” catching transposons that land in them when the mobile element jumps. Once the transposon is captured, its expression is restricted, since the DNA is wrapped up by heterochromatin. piRNAs that are synthesized from the transposon’s landing site continuously recruit chromatin remodeling genes to the site. Since piRNAs are amplifiable, this transposon memorization is transgenerational. 