We treated rat hippocampal neurons with two widely used ER stress inducers: the ER-Ca2+-ATPase blocker Thapsigargin (Tg) and the N-glycosylation inhibitor Tunicamycin (Tn) (Li et al , 2000; Urano et al , 2000). For the purpose of this study, we decided to use 0.5 μM for Tg and 4 μg/ml for Tn since at these doses we observed a robust ER-stress induced UPR activation and ER-stress induced cell death of at least 50–60% neuronal cells.When assessing the effect of ER stress on the Akt/mTOR pathway, we found a response that varied with duration of treatment. In contrast, longer exposure to Tg (24hrs) correlated with a progressive decrease in Akt activity (phospho-Akt Ser473) and in the phosphorylation of Tsc2 at Thr1462 (Figure 1A, C, E), a known Akt phosphorylation site (Inoki et al , 2002; Potter et al , 2002). In contrast, longer exposure to Tg (24hrs) correlated with a progressive decrease in Akt activity (phospho-Akt Ser473) and in the phosphorylation of Tsc2 at Thr1462 (Figure 1A, C, E), a known Akt phosphorylation site (Inoki et al , 2002; Potter et al , 2002). Similar results were obtained when assessing baseline cell death by Trypan Blue exclusion assay for Tg (Figure 3D) and Tn (Figure 3F). Similar results were obtained when assessing baseline cell death by Trypan Blue exclusion assay for Tg (Figure 3D) and Tn (Figure 3F). Similar results were obtained when assessing baseline cell death by Trypan Blue exclusion assay for Tg (Figure 3D) and Tn (Figure 3F). To further confirm induction of apoptosis in Tsc2-knockdown cells, we assessed cytoplasmic levels of cytochrome c, a marker of early apoptosis (Ferri and Kroemer, 2001; Rao et al , 2001). To further confirm induction of apoptosis in Tsc2-knockdown cells, we assessed cytoplasmic levels of cytochrome c, a marker of early apoptosis (Ferri and Kroemer, 2001; Rao et al , 2001). While ER stress has been demonstrated in Tsc-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts and kidney tumors (Ozcan et al , 2008), it remains unclear whether TSC-deficiency leads to ER stress in neurons, what role mTOR pathway plays in neuronal stress response, and whether similar dysfunctions are present in seizure-models of Tsc in vivo. MT-Red generates fluorescence only upon oxidation by superoxide produced by mitochondria (Kim et al , 2002). MT-Red generates fluorescence only upon oxidation by superoxide produced by mitochondria (Kim et al , 2002). A 1.7 fold increase in FMI of MT-Red was found in Tsc2-Sh cultures compared to control (*p<0.05 by t-test). Rat hippocampal neurons were first infected with either GL3-Sh virus or Tsc2-Sh virus and after 6 days they were re-infected with lentiviral vectors expressing either a CHOP-Sh or control CHOP-C constructs. A significant reduction was also identified in the oxidative stress response of Tsc2-deficient cultures infected with CHOP-Sh compared to those infected CHOP-C virus (Figure 5D). To investigate whether a similar inhibition was occurring in Tsc-deficient neurons, we analyzed Akt at the phospho-Ser473 activation site using western blot. To determine whether a similar stress response occurs in vivo, we assessed levels of expression for CHOP and HO-1 in total brain lysates from Tsc1c/−SynCre+ mice (neuronal Tsc1 knockout) (Meikle et al , 2007). Tsc1c/−SynCre+ mice experience near complete loss of Tsc1 expression in neurons, and display neurological decline with median survival of 35 days. Both the neurological abnormalities and the median survival are markedly improved when mutant mice are treated with rapamycin from P7 to P33 (Meikle et al , 2008). Both the neurological abnormalities and the median survival are markedly improved when mutant mice are treated with rapamycin from P7 to P33 (Meikle et al , 2008). Both the neurological abnormalities and the median survival are markedly improved when mutant mice are treated with rapamycin from P7 to P33 (Meikle et al , 2008). Interestingly, Tsc1c/−SynCre+ mice taken off rapamycin after 3 weeks of treatment showed recurrence of HO-1 expression (Suppl. Co-staining with phospho-S6 antibody was used to identify neurons with increased mTOR activity. Co-staining with phospho-S6 antibody was used to identify neurons with increased mTOR activity. Co-staining with phospho-S6 antibody was used to identify neurons with increased mTOR activity. Co-staining with phospho-S6 antibody was used to identify neurons with increased mTOR activity. Co-staining with phospho-S6 antibody was used to identify neurons with increased mTOR activity. Co-staining with phospho-S6 antibody was used to identify neurons with increased mTOR activity. Giant cells with increased mTOR activity were identified in the human tuber by phospho-S6 antibody staining (Figure 6E). Giant cells with increased mTOR activity were identified in the human tuber by phospho-S6 antibody staining (Figure 6E). Giant cells with increased mTOR activity were identified in the human tuber by phospho-S6 antibody staining (Figure 6E). No CHOP or HO-1 staining was observed in the peri-tuber brain regions (Figure 6F) or in the brain of a non-TSC patient with focal dysplasia (Figure 6G). In agreement with previous reports, balloon cells that are typically found in focal dysplasias showed some phospho-S6 and SMI311 staining (Lurton et al , 2002; Baybis et al , 2004). In agreement with previous reports, balloon cells that are typically found in focal dysplasias showed some phospho-S6 and SMI311 staining (Lurton et al , 2002; Baybis et al , 2004). In agreement with previous reports, balloon cells that are typically found in focal dysplasias showed some phospho-S6 and SMI311 staining (Lurton et al , 2002; Baybis et al , 2004). Despite recent progress identifying the genetic mutations and the signaling pathways associated with TSC pathology, the pathogenesis of the diverse neurological symptoms present in this disease remain poorly understood, and treatments are elusive. Despite recent progress identifying the genetic mutations and the signaling pathways associated with TSC pathology, the pathogenesis of the diverse neurological symptoms present in this disease remain poorly understood, and treatments are elusive. Despite recent progress identifying the genetic mutations and the signaling pathways associated with TSC pathology, the pathogenesis of the diverse neurological symptoms present in this disease remain poorly understood, and treatments are elusive. The identification of similar stress responses in primary rodent hippocampal neurons with nearly complete Tsc2 gene silencing and in the human TSC brain highlight the damaging neuronal responses that result from mTOR hyperactivity. This is particularly important in TSC disease because the vast majority of patients experience seizures and many of the cases are medically-intractable. For instance, UPR-regulated genes can create an imbalance in the cellular redox status and release free radicals such as superoxide anions, leading to damage of ER-resident proteins (Verkhratsky and Petersen, 2002). However, excessive HO-1 can also contribute to the increase of carbon monoxide (CO) and/or free iron levels, which can have toxic effects on mitochondrial function (Ryter and Tyrrell, 2000; Baranano and Snyder, 2001; Schipper, 2004a). In addition, excess CO production could cause dysfunction in synaptic plasticity and consequently lead to defects in cognitive development (Stevens and Wang, 1993; Zhuo et al , 1993). TSC patients suffer from epilepsy, autism and developmental delay. Lentivirus infectionViral stocks for lentiviral infection were prepared as previously described (Mostoslavsky et al , 2005), except that the four packaging vectors (kindly provided by Dr. R C. Mulligan) were cotransfected into HEK293 T cells with the plasmid to be co-expressed using Lipofectamine 2000 according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Lentivirus infectionViral stocks for lentiviral infection were prepared as previously described (Mostoslavsky et al , 2005), except that the four packaging vectors (kindly provided by Dr. R C. Mulligan) were cotransfected into HEK293 T cells with the plasmid to be co-expressed using Lipofectamine 2000 according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Lentivirus infectionViral stocks for lentiviral infection were prepared as previously described (Mostoslavsky et al , 2005), except that the four packaging vectors (kindly provided by Dr. R C. Mulligan) were cotransfected into HEK293 T cells with the plasmid to be co-expressed using Lipofectamine 2000 according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Lentivirus infectionViral stocks for lentiviral infection were prepared as previously described (Mostoslavsky et al , 2005), except that the four packaging vectors (kindly provided by Dr. R C. Mulligan) were cotransfected into HEK293 T cells with the plasmid to be co-expressed using Lipofectamine 2000 according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Control ShRNAi construct against the luciferase gene (here referred as GL3-Sh) was previously described (Flavell et al , 2006). The sequences of the primers for both semiquantitative and qPCRs are listed in the Supplementary Material. In all cases, data were expressed as means of at least three independent experiments +/− SE. Statistical analysis was performed by unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test and considered significant at p <0.05. Antibodies and ReagentsAntibodies used for this study included: rabbit polyclonal anti-phospho-S6 (Ser234/Ser235) (cat. 3611), (all from Cell signaling Technology); rabbit polyclonal anti-Tsc2 (sc-893), mouse monoclonal anti-GADD153 (CHOP) (cat. Stocks of drugs were made in DMSO and freshly diluted in NB media at 20x of the final concentration before performing each experiment. Before ER stress induction, NB/B27 media was replaced with NB in the presence of penicillin/streptomycin for 4hrs, and drugs were then added for an additional 3, 6, and 24 hrs. Before ER stress induction, NB/B27 media was replaced with NB in the presence of penicillin/streptomycin for 4hrs, and drugs were then added for an additional 3, 6, and 24 hrs. Before ER stress induction, NB/B27 media was replaced with NB in the presence of penicillin/streptomycin for 4hrs, and drugs were then added for an additional 3, 6, and 24 hrs. When included, rapamycin was used for 24hrs in NB media at a final concentration of 20nM. Neurons were then washed in PBS, mounted and analyzed with a Leica DM RXA microscope equipped with epifluorescence. Data are expressed as means from at least three different experiments +/− SE, and statistical analysis was performed by Student t-test. Apoptotic cells were evaluated under bright field microscopy by counting non-viable cells (dye-positive) and viable cells (dye-negative) on hemocytometer fields.For quantification of cell death at the single cell level, the number of apoptotic cells was determined by counting cleaved caspase 3 (Cell Signaling cat. Statistical analysis was performed by unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test and considered significant at p <0.05. Mitochondrial ROSRat hippocampal neurons were cultured in NB media for 24 hrs followed by incubation with 100nM MitoTracker® Red CM-H2XRos dye (Molecular Probes) for 30min before being processed for immunofluorescence and stained with Hoechst. Mitochondrial ROSRat hippocampal neurons were cultured in NB media for 24 hrs followed by incubation with 100nM MitoTracker® Red CM-H2XRos dye (Molecular Probes) for 30min before being processed for immunofluorescence and stained with Hoechst. Flow Cytometric AnalysisNeurons cultured in NB media for 24 hrs were harvested by 5min incubation at 37C with 15U/ml of papain (Worthington) made in Hank’s Balanced Salt Solution containing 10mM MgCl2, 1mM kynurenic acid, 10mM HEPES and penicillin/streptomycin. Neurons were then collected by centrifugation, washed and resuspended in NB media at 2× 106cells/ml. 