Similarly, treatment of ESCs undergoing differentiation with the VFM collected from pluripotent ESCs was markedly less effective in promoting the expression of pluripotency markers in recipient cells, compared to ESC-derived EVs (Figure 6J, compare lanes 3 and 4). However, when an ~15-fold excess (i.e., 5.0 μg) of purified fibronectin over what is typically associated with the EVs from pluripotent ESCs was used to treat ESCs placed in N2B27 medium, the levels of FAK activity as well as Oct3/4 and Nanog expression were increased compared to untreated cells (Figure S6D). The MVs and exosomes from ESCs that had undergone differentiation, such that they produced EVs that lacked fibronectin (see Figure 6A), were similarly labeled with FM1-43FX before being used to treat other ESCs. The MVs and exosomes from ESCs that had undergone differentiation, such that they produced EVs that lacked fibronectin (see Figure 6A), were similarly labeled with FM1-43FX before being used to treat other ESCs. The MVs and exosomes from ESCs that had undergone differentiation, such that they produced EVs that lacked fibronectin (see Figure 6A), were similarly labeled with FM1-43FX before being used to treat other ESCs. The MVs and exosomes from ESCs that had undergone differentiation, such that they produced EVs that lacked fibronectin (see Figure 6A), were similarly labeled with FM1-43FX before being used to treat other ESCs. The MVs and exosomes from ESCs that had undergone differentiation, such that they produced EVs that lacked fibronectin (see Figure 6A), were similarly labeled with FM1-43FX before being used to treat other ESCs. Extracellular vesicles (EVs) have emerged as an important form of intercellular communication and are attracting significant attention due to their roles in several different physiological and pathological processes. Also, there have been suggestions that EVs produced by stem cells can be used for regenerative purposes by promoting the survival and recovery of diseased or damaged cells (Hur et al , 2020; Khan et al , 2015; Rani et al , 2015). Also, there have been suggestions that EVs produced by stem cells can be used for regenerative purposes by promoting the survival and recovery of diseased or damaged cells (Hur et al , 2020; Khan et al , 2015; Rani et al , 2015). Previous studies have shown that fibronectin associates with both MVs and exosomes and that it plays important roles in the ability of EVs to contribute to cancer progression, as well as in the developing embryo where its association with MVs helps to activate trophoblast migration and invasion into the uterine wall (Antonyak et al , 2011; Desrochers et al , 2016b; Jeppesen et al , 2019). This would be expected to significantly increase the potency of FAK activation and thereby provide a strong signaling cue for maintaining stem cell phenotypes, i.e., the ability to form spheres, exhibit enhanced AP activity, and express pluripotent markers. To achieve such a goal, there has been a great deal of research effort aimed at understanding the regulatory cues that enable ESCs to maintain their pluripotent state and, at the appropriate time, induce their differentiation to a specific cell lineage. RESOURCE AVAILABILITYLead ContactFurther information and requests for reagents may be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Richard Cerione (rac1@cornell.edu).Materials AvailabilityThis study did not generate new unique reagents.Data and Code AvailabilityOriginal data are deposited in Mendeley Data: http://doi.org/10.17632/mt4gm74tbw.1 This medium is referred to as 2i+LIF medium. The medium was replaced daily for up to 5 days.Inhibitor and Purified Fibronectin TreatmentsCells maintained under the indicated culturing conditions were treated with 7.5 μM FAK inhibitor III (FAKi), 2.5 μM Y15 (also referred to as FAK inhibitor 14), 25 μg/ml RGD peptide, and either 320 ng or 5.0 μg of purified fibronectin. those larger than 0.22 μm) were considered microvesicles (MVs), and were either resuspended in PBS for use primarily in biological assays, or lysed using lysis buffer (25 mM Tris, 100 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM NaVO4, 1 mM β-glycerol phosphate, 1 μg/ml aprotinin, and 1 μg/ml leupeptin). A linear sucrose gradient was assembled on top of the mixture by sequentially layering 700 μl of 15 fractions (i.e. FM1-43FX dye (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was then added to the partially clarified medium to a final concentration of 5 μg/ml for 30 minutes. 10 μl of 2% uranyl acetate was then applied to the grid twice for 30 seconds, at which point blotting with filter paper was used to remove excess liquid. 10 μl of 2% uranyl acetate was then applied to the grid twice for 30 seconds, at which point blotting with filter paper was used to remove excess liquid. The membranes were blocked with 10% BSA in 20 mM Tris, 135 mM NaCl, and 0.02% Tween 20 (TBST) for 30 minutes, and then incubated with the indicated primary antibodies diluted in TBST overnight. The medium was replaced daily for 3 days, at which point the cells were passaged, plated again in 6 well ultra-low attachment plates at a density of 20,000 cells/well, and maintained in 2i+LIF medium. The medium was replaced daily for 3 days, at which point the cells were passaged, plated again in 6 well ultra-low attachment plates at a density of 20,000 cells/well, and maintained in 2i+LIF medium. The medium was replaced daily for 3 days, at which point the cells were passaged, plated again in 6 well ultra-low attachment plates at a density of 20,000 cells/well, and maintained in 2i+LIF medium. MEFs were also plated in ultra-low attachment plates and cultured in the same condition. The slides were permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 diluted in PBS, blocked with 10% BSA diluted in PBS, and incubated with an Oct3/4 antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and a Nanog antibody (Abcam) diluted in 5% BSA in PBS at a 1:200 dilution, for 2 hours. The slides were washed with PBS, and then were incubated with an anti-mouse IgG-Alexa 488 conjugate antibody (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and an anti-rabbit IgG-Alexa 548 conjugate antibody (Thermo Fisher Scientific) diluted in 5% BSA in PBS at a 1:400 dilution, for 1 hour. The slides were again washed with PBS and visualized by brightfield and fluorescent microscopy. All images were captured using IPLABS software (BD Biosciences) and processed using ImageJ software.Embryo Collection and Blastocyst Outgrowth AssaysFemale FVB/N mice, between 8 and 20 weeks of age (Jackson Laboratory), were super-ovulated by injecting pregnant mare’s serum gonadotropin (PMSG) and human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG). The concentration of cDNA was measured using a NanoDrop Spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the cDNA samples were subjected to RT-PCRESC Microinjection into Mouse BlastocystsFemale B6(Cg)-Tyrc-2J/J (B6-albino) mice, between 8 and 20 weeks of age (Jackson Laboratory), were super-ovulated by injecting pregnant mare’s serum gonadotropin (PMSG) and human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG). At the same time, the v6.5 ESC line derived from C57BL/6 X 129/sv mice was plated in 60 mm dishes (without a fibroblast feeder layer) at a density of 1.47 x 106 cells/dish (i.e. We recently described how the larger-sized EVs (i.e., MVs) produced by pluripotent cells in the ICM can be transferred to the trophectoderm in blastocysts to promote implantation, an early step in pregnancy in which the developing embryo attaches and invades into the uterus (Desrochers et al , 2016b). ESCs Generate and Release Large Quantities of EVsAn important question in developmental and stem cell biology concerns the underlying mechanism by which the pluripotency of the cells that comprise the epiblast is maintained. ESCs Generate and Release Large Quantities of EVsAn important question in developmental and stem cell biology concerns the underlying mechanism by which the pluripotency of the cells that comprise the epiblast is maintained. ESCs Generate and Release Large Quantities of EVsAn important question in developmental and stem cell biology concerns the underlying mechanism by which the pluripotency of the cells that comprise the epiblast is maintained. In contrast, differentiated mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) showed little or no detectable expression of these proteins, with the exception of Klf4; whereas, as expected, they expressed the fibroblast marker, Thy1 (Rege and Hagood, 2006). Figures 1B and S1C show that ESCs formed spheres under these defined culture conditions, which were maintained for at least 5 additional passages (Figure S1D), and nearly all of the ESC spheroids were positive for AP activity (Figures 1C and S1E). Figures 1B and S1C show that ESCs formed spheres under these defined culture conditions, which were maintained for at least 5 additional passages (Figure S1D), and nearly all of the ESC spheroids were positive for AP activity (Figures 1C and S1E). Figures 1B and S1C show that ESCs formed spheres under these defined culture conditions, which were maintained for at least 5 additional passages (Figure S1D), and nearly all of the ESC spheroids were positive for AP activity (Figures 1C and S1E). The ESC-derived MVs and exosomes were further resolved by sucrose density gradient sedimentation. Twelve distinct fractions from each EV preparation were collected and pooled together in groups of four, representing low-, intermediate-, and high-density fractions. Therefore, we set out to determine whether the EVs shed by ESCs could potentially play an important role in this regulation. Therefore, we set out to determine whether the EVs shed by ESCs could potentially play an important role in this regulation. When ESCs were cultured in this medium for 3 days, their growth rate was markedly slowed (Figure 2A), with ~70% of the ESCs undergoing cell death when grown in N2B27 medium for 5 days (Figure 2B). ESCs that were cultured under differentiation conditions and treated with either MVs or exosomes from pluripotent ESCs also retained their ability to form spheres and express AP activity (Figures 3D–3F). Western blot analysis performed on the MV and exosome fractions collected from ESCs showed that they contained extremely low, and in most cases, undetectable levels of the core stemness proteins Oct3/4, Nanog, Sox2, Klf4, and c-Myc (Figure S4A). Western blot analysis performed on the MV and exosome fractions collected from ESCs showed that they contained extremely low, and in most cases, undetectable levels of the core stemness proteins Oct3/4, Nanog, Sox2, Klf4, and c-Myc (Figure S4A). Western blot analysis performed on the MV and exosome fractions collected from ESCs showed that they contained extremely low, and in most cases, undetectable levels of the core stemness proteins Oct3/4, Nanog, Sox2, Klf4, and c-Myc (Figure S4A). Western blot analysis performed on the MV and exosome fractions collected from ESCs showed that they contained extremely low, and in most cases, undetectable levels of the core stemness proteins Oct3/4, Nanog, Sox2, Klf4, and c-Myc (Figure S4A). They then undergo epigenetic alterations that activate a distinct set of transcriptional machinery (Dodge et al , 2004; O’Carroll et al , 2001; Tachibana et al , 2002), which cause them to differentiate into the germline as well as the three primary germ layers, namely ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm, that will eventually give rise to every tissue and organ within an organism (Murry and Keller, 2008). They then undergo epigenetic alterations that activate a distinct set of transcriptional machinery (Dodge et al , 2004; O’Carroll et al , 2001; Tachibana et al , 2002), which cause them to differentiate into the germline as well as the three primary germ layers, namely ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm, that will eventually give rise to every tissue and organ within an organism (Murry and Keller, 2008). They then undergo epigenetic alterations that activate a distinct set of transcriptional machinery (Dodge et al , 2004; O’Carroll et al , 2001; Tachibana et al , 2002), which cause them to differentiate into the germline as well as the three primary germ layers, namely ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm, that will eventually give rise to every tissue and organ within an organism (Murry and Keller, 2008). They then undergo epigenetic alterations that activate a distinct set of transcriptional machinery (Dodge et al , 2004; O’Carroll et al , 2001; Tachibana et al , 2002), which cause them to differentiate into the germline as well as the three primary germ layers, namely ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm, that will eventually give rise to every tissue and organ within an organism (Murry and Keller, 2008). Similar results were obtained when a second FAK inhibitor, Y15 (also sometimes referred to as FAK inhibitor 14), was used (Figures S5A–S5C)To further examine the role of FAK in maintaining a stem cell phenotype, ESCs were placed in N2B27 differentiation medium containing various combinations of MVs and exosomes isolated from ESCs and treated without or with one of the two FAK inhibitors, FAK inhibitor III (FAKi) or Y15. We also detected fibronectin in the sucrose gradient fractions that contained MVs and exosomes, i.e., in the intermediate-density fractions (Figure 6B). When these vesicles were used to treat ESCs undergoing differentiation, they were unable to maintain Oct3/4 and Nanog expression, unlike EVs derived from pluripotent ESCs (Figure 6C, compare lanes 3 and 4). When these vesicles were used to treat ESCs undergoing differentiation, they were unable to maintain Oct3/4 and Nanog expression, unlike EVs derived from pluripotent ESCs (Figure 6C, compare lanes 3 and 4). When these vesicles were used to treat ESCs undergoing differentiation, they were unable to maintain Oct3/4 and Nanog expression, unlike EVs derived from pluripotent ESCs (Figure 6C, compare lanes 3 and 4). 