The values used for data processing were the gram force values corresponding to each filament number. For Fos induction, the right hindpaw was submerged in water heated to 52°C for 2 min and the interdigital space pinched for 15 seconds to stimulate CGRP+ and IB4+ axons respectively. For Fos induction, the right hindpaw was submerged in water heated to 52°C for 2 min and the interdigital space pinched for 15 seconds to stimulate CGRP+ and IB4+ axons respectively. Lumbar spinal cord and DRGs were isolated and incubated in the same fixative for approximately 24 hours. To determine if this topographic targeting was a result of the route of neurotrophin application (DRG or spinal cord expression) or the neurotrophin itself, we expressed NGF, artemin, or GDNF within the spinal cord or DRG after dorsal root injury. Visualization was achieved by incubating sections in biotinylated secondary antibody (except for IB4 as it is already biotinylated) followed by vectastain Elite ABC reagents (Vector laboratories, Burlingame, CA), and developed using the peroxidase substrate, 3,3-diaminobenzidine to generate brown color. cFos images captured at 10x was used for cFos counting. All quantification of images were performed by a trained student who was unaware of the individual treatments. Laser scanning confocal microscopy for CTB labeled axonsImages from CTB labeled sections were acquired using confocal microscopy (Nikon C2). Consistent with previous observations, gene expression was restricted within the dorsal horn on the injected side of the spinal cord. In contrast to adenoviral injections, lentiviral injections showed little tissue damage or cytotoxicity. Sixty percent of the lentivirus infected cells appear to have morphology reminiscent of astrocytes. Sixty percent of the lentivirus infected cells appear to have morphology reminiscent of astrocytes. Western blot analysis showed good expression of artemin (Fig. We hypothesized that the pattern of regeneration elicited by individual neurotrophins is unique to that neurotrophin and can be influenced by the expressed distribution of the neurotrophin or, in the case of artemin, the neurotrophin and co-receptor complex. We hypothesized that the pattern of regeneration elicited by individual neurotrophins is unique to that neurotrophin and can be influenced by the expressed distribution of the neurotrophin or, in the case of artemin, the neurotrophin and co-receptor complex. Differential targeting of regenerating axons by NGF or arteminIn normal spinal cord the distribution of CGRP+ fibers is restricted to the superficial dorsal horn (Fig. For these experiments, dorsal root lesions completely transected all the sensory axons in the L4/L5 dorsal root causing degeneration of axons innervating the spinal cord. For these experiments, dorsal root lesions completely transected all the sensory axons in the L4/L5 dorsal root causing degeneration of axons innervating the spinal cord. For these experiments, dorsal root lesions completely transected all the sensory axons in the L4/L5 dorsal root causing degeneration of axons innervating the spinal cord. For these experiments, dorsal root lesions completely transected all the sensory axons in the L4/L5 dorsal root causing degeneration of axons innervating the spinal cord. For these experiments, dorsal root lesions completely transected all the sensory axons in the L4/L5 dorsal root causing degeneration of axons innervating the spinal cord. For these experiments, dorsal root lesions completely transected all the sensory axons in the L4/L5 dorsal root causing degeneration of axons innervating the spinal cord. Excitingly, spinal cord expression of artemin induced physiologically restricted and topographically targeted regeneration of CGRP+ fibers within the superficial dorsal horn (Fig. Regeneration of myelinated sensory afferents was examined by injecting cholera toxin B (Robertson and Grant, 1985) into the sciatic nerve. 5D & d) expressed within the spinal cord induced regeneration of CTB labeled axons. 5D & d) expressed within the spinal cord induced regeneration of CTB labeled axons. 5D & d) expressed within the spinal cord induced regeneration of CTB labeled axons. These sensations are lost within the respective dermatomes after dorsal root lesions. These sensations are lost within the respective dermatomes after dorsal root lesions. These sensations are lost within the respective dermatomes after dorsal root lesions. These sensations are lost within the respective dermatomes after dorsal root lesions. These sensations are lost within the respective dermatomes after dorsal root lesions. The coding regions of alternatively- spliced form of rat GDNF (GDNF555, NCBI reference # S75585.1) and rat GFRα1 (NCBI reference # NM_012959) were kindly supplied by Amgen. Accumulated viral particles from the supernatant were purified by sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation to produce high titer in vivo quality lentivirus. In normal uninjured animals, the majority of cFos expression was localized to the superficial dorsal horn (lamina I&II) (Fig. 7A & F); whereas, after lesioning dorsal roots L3–L6, cFos is virtually absent in GFP lesion controls (Fig. This indicates that regenerating axons form functional connections onto second order neurons. This indicates that regenerating axons form functional connections onto second order neurons. Virus was resuspended in a Tris buffer containing rat serum albumin and mannitol. In the case of GDNF, cFos immunoreactivity was very low and they were distributed randomly without a clear pattern (Fig. Similarly, we also expressed GFRα1, the cognate receptor for GDNF, along with GDNF in the spinal dorsal horn (Fig. 8D & d) to evaluate whether the effects on targeting is influenced by expression of GDNF family of receptors or depends on the phenotype of regenerating axons (CGRP fibers in NGF or artemin vs. IB4 fibers in GDNF). 9) and deeper myelinated sensory afferents (Fig. 9) and deeper myelinated sensory afferents (Fig. 9) and deeper myelinated sensory afferents (Fig. In Figure 3 we show that artemin and GDNF, but not NGF, induces regeneration of IB4+ axons. In Figure 3 we show that artemin and GDNF, but not NGF, induces regeneration of IB4+ axons. In Figure 3 we show that artemin and GDNF, but not NGF, induces regeneration of IB4+ axons. In Figure 3 we show that artemin and GDNF, but not NGF, induces regeneration of IB4+ axons. Artemin and NGF have flag tags and GFRα3 has a myc tag. The production of exogenous artemin and GFRα3 was confirmed by probing Western blots for flag (anti-M2 flag (1:1000), Sigma) and myc antibody (9E10 (1:1000), Cell Center, UPENN), respectively. By day 50, comparison of artemin+NGF or artemin+ GFRα3 to baseline control values from day zero (before crush) were statistically significant (δp<0.05), as determined by a one way ANOVA, indicating mild hyperalgesia (Dunnett’s multiple comparison test). This shows that even though there was thermal hyperalgesia in artemin+NGF and artemin+GFRα3, there was no allodynia. The lack of robust IB4 regeneration in these groups might be contributing to the absence of allodynia (Zhang et al , 2013a). On the other hand, despite robust IB4 regeneration, absence of ectopic CGRP regeneration in GDNF, artemin+GDNF and GDNF+GFRα1 groups might be the reason for lack of recovery of thermal nociception. On the other hand, despite robust IB4 regeneration, absence of ectopic CGRP regeneration in GDNF, artemin+GDNF and GDNF+GFRα1 groups might be the reason for lack of recovery of thermal nociception. On the other hand, despite robust IB4 regeneration, absence of ectopic CGRP regeneration in GDNF, artemin+GDNF and GDNF+GFRα1 groups might be the reason for lack of recovery of thermal nociception. Reestablishment of synaptic connections in the appropriate target locations is of paramount significance in axonal regeneration. Reestablishment of synaptic connections in the appropriate target locations is of paramount significance in axonal regeneration. Hence, it is important to instruct regenerating axons to grow to their original synaptic locations. The dorsumof each animal was clipped and disinfected with povidone-iodine before opening the skin and fascia. Neurotrophins induce chemoattractive guidance of regenerating axons specifically by activating receptors at the axon tip (Campenot, 1982; Kimpinski et al , 1997; Zhou and Snider, 2006). Neurotrophins induce chemoattractive guidance of regenerating axons specifically by activating receptors at the axon tip (Campenot, 1982; Kimpinski et al , 1997; Zhou and Snider, 2006). Neurotrophins induce chemoattractive guidance of regenerating axons specifically by activating receptors at the axon tip (Campenot, 1982; Kimpinski et al , 1997; Zhou and Snider, 2006). Neurotrophins induce chemoattractive guidance of regenerating axons specifically by activating receptors at the axon tip (Campenot, 1982; Kimpinski et al , 1997; Zhou and Snider, 2006). Neurotrophins induce chemoattractive guidance of regenerating axons specifically by activating receptors at the axon tip (Campenot, 1982; Kimpinski et al , 1997; Zhou and Snider, 2006). Neurotrophins induce chemoattractive guidance of regenerating axons specifically by activating receptors at the axon tip (Campenot, 1982; Kimpinski et al , 1997; Zhou and Snider, 2006). Similar mechanisms operate in axonal guidance during development. This phenomenon most likely is either due to the lack of sufficient synaptic connectivity to drive hyperexcitability or the requirement of other sensory modalities for co-activation of pain pathways (Lin et al , 2014). Interestingly, these groups, whether or not they developed hyperalgesia, showed a similar level of cFos activation within the superficial region of the dorsal horn. After topical application of lidocaine, dorsal roots L3–L6 were identified and exposed. After topical application of lidocaine, dorsal roots L3–L6 were identified and exposed. After topical application of lidocaine, dorsal roots L3–L6 were identified and exposed. Many of these artemin-induced responses appear mediated through GFR-α3. Many of these artemin-induced responses appear mediated through GFR-α3. With the use of #5 Dumont forceps, triple-crush lesions, 10 seconds each, were inflicted at two sites separated by 3mm along the L4 and L5 afferents at 5–8 mm from the DREZ. These data indicate a topographic targeting of synapses to their normal laminar locations. Unlike NGF, which binds directly to its signaling receptor, artemin needs to bind to a non-signaling co-receptor (GFR-α3) prior to binding to its signaling receptor cRet (Baloh et al , 1998) The GFR-α3 co-receptor is expressed primarily by neurons within the peripheral nervous system and very little, if any, hybridization signal has been identified in spinal cord (Widenfalk et al , 1998). Unlike NGF, which binds directly to its signaling receptor, artemin needs to bind to a non-signaling co-receptor (GFR-α3) prior to binding to its signaling receptor cRet (Baloh et al , 1998) The GFR-α3 co-receptor is expressed primarily by neurons within the peripheral nervous system and very little, if any, hybridization signal has been identified in spinal cord (Widenfalk et al , 1998). Unlike NGF, which binds directly to its signaling receptor, artemin needs to bind to a non-signaling co-receptor (GFR-α3) prior to binding to its signaling receptor cRet (Baloh et al , 1998) The GFR-α3 co-receptor is expressed primarily by neurons within the peripheral nervous system and very little, if any, hybridization signal has been identified in spinal cord (Widenfalk et al , 1998). Unlike NGF, which binds directly to its signaling receptor, artemin needs to bind to a non-signaling co-receptor (GFR-α3) prior to binding to its signaling receptor cRet (Baloh et al , 1998) The GFR-α3 co-receptor is expressed primarily by neurons within the peripheral nervous system and very little, if any, hybridization signal has been identified in spinal cord (Widenfalk et al , 1998). Unlike NGF, which binds directly to its signaling receptor, artemin needs to bind to a non-signaling co-receptor (GFR-α3) prior to binding to its signaling receptor cRet (Baloh et al , 1998) The GFR-α3 co-receptor is expressed primarily by neurons within the peripheral nervous system and very little, if any, hybridization signal has been identified in spinal cord (Widenfalk et al , 1998). Under this condition, artemin binds to GFR-α3 on axons prior to binding onto cRet in the cis confirmation, inducing dimerization and signal transduction (Santoro et al , 2004). Signaling through the trans complex is thought to be different to that of cis binding, being slightly delayed with a longer duration (Paratcha et al , 2001). Signaling through the trans complex is thought to be different to that of cis binding, being slightly delayed with a longer duration (Paratcha et al , 2001). Signaling through the trans complex is thought to be different to that of cis binding, being slightly delayed with a longer duration (Paratcha et al , 2001). Here we show, in the presence of artemin, ectopic expression of GFR-α3 within the spinal cord can alter the growth of axons, thus possibly functioning through a similar trans mechanism. The animals were maintained on a heated pad until complete recovery from anesthesia. The animals were maintained on a heated pad until complete recovery from anesthesia. Buprenorphine was administered intramuscularly (0.05 mg/kg) following surgery to help alleviate pain and discomfort.Injections to Dorsal root gangliaIn animals under anesthesia, a 3cm skin incision was made on the dorsal midline starting from the superior iliac crest and extending in the rostral direction. The muscle was separated to expose the sciatic nerve. The sciatic nerve was injected with 2–3 μl of 2% cholera toxin B subunit using a Hamilton syringe with a 30 gauge needle. The sciatic nerve was injected with 2–3 μl of 2% cholera toxin B subunit using a Hamilton syringe with a 30 gauge needle. The artemin/GFR-α3 complex then binds and activates cRet, a primary tyrosine kinase receptor for the GDNF-family of neurotrophins. A halogen lamp beneath the glass surface is used to direct an intense light beam onto the plantar surface of the hind paw. A halogen lamp beneath the glass surface is used to direct an intense light beam onto the plantar surface of the hind paw. A halogen lamp beneath the glass surface is used to direct an intense light beam onto the plantar surface of the hind paw. Thermal intensities of 50% of the maximum power output of the lamp were tested for the entire duration of the experiment. Thermal intensities of 50% of the maximum power output of the lamp were tested for the entire duration of the experiment. Right side L4/L5 crush increased PWL close to the cut off value and raising the ratio to a value closer to 2. A ratio significantly lower than the baseline ratio is represented as hyperalgesia. Since GFRα3 is bound to the membrane by a glycophosphatidylinositol anchor, one could envision injury inducing release and soluble artemin/GFR-α3 complex. Pressure to the paw was applied at thirty two grams per second. Pressure to the paw was applied at thirty two grams per second. Gridwalk testA custom made horizontal ladder with irregularly spaced rungs was used to test for proprioception. The percent efficiency in the right hindlimb was evaluated as a measure of proprioception. The percent efficiency in the right hindlimb was evaluated as a measure of proprioception. The percent efficiency in the right hindlimb was evaluated as a measure of proprioception. The percent efficiency in the right hindlimb was evaluated as a measure of proprioception. This complex could potential diffuse and bind to other cRet expressing neurons thus supporting regeneration of other non-GFRα3 expressing DRG neurons, thus, potentially increasing regeneration of all cRet expressing DRG neurons. This complex could potential diffuse and bind to other cRet expressing neurons thus supporting regeneration of other non-GFRα3 expressing DRG neurons, thus, potentially increasing regeneration of all cRet expressing DRG neurons. This complex could potential diffuse and bind to other cRet expressing neurons thus supporting regeneration of other non-GFRα3 expressing DRG neurons, thus, potentially increasing regeneration of all cRet expressing DRG neurons. Animals were placed on a wire mesh floor and fruit cereals were provided during this behavioral testing. Animals were placed on a wire mesh floor and fruit cereals were provided during this behavioral testing. Each monofilament was applied in a smooth and steady manner over a two second period until it bends. 