Each of the three evaluation approaches will also be examined by subpopulations (socio-demographic groups, initial high or low obesogenic risk, and site of care), and where appropriate, by extent of participation in the First 1000 Days program (duration, intensity, and plurality of programmatic components participation). We have used the Collective Impact collaborative process to design multi-factorial system-level obesity prevention interventions that operate across early life clinical and public health services at community health centers with high-risk populations for development of childhood obesity. First, all intervention components, implementation of systems changes, and monitored outcomes are directly informed by key stakeholders from the early life clinical and public health programs operating at the program’s health centers. The use of a Collective Impact approach to design and implement the program allowed us to identify specific needs and barriers raised by the participating clinicians and programs that interface directly with vulnerable families, and this information was then used to shape and unify broad changes in the health center systems. By intention, the First 1000 Days interventions are implemented across a variety of health center clinical and public health programs and providers, which inevitably includes some degree of variability in program component administration and utilization. The multi-faceted intervention components of the First 1000 Days program provide the foundation for a model of early life obesity prevention that could be widely disseminated as we strive to improve health outcomes for children and their families most at risk in Massachusetts and across the US. We have used the CI framework to build cross-sector collaboration and establish a common agenda of obesity prevention in early-life clinical and public health services co-located at three community health centers, which has in turn informed the design of the First 1000 Days program to reduce obesity risk factors among low-income mother-infant pairs and close the gap in obesity disparities. The First 1000 Days program is being conducted in three community health centers serving predominantly low-income, racial/ethnic minority populations in Revere, Chelsea, and Dorchester, MA. All three communities have higher percentages of low-income residents than the state as a whole and childhood obesity rates substantially higher than the state-wide average (Table 2). The community health centers were selected for their patient demographics, as well as for their affiliation with Massachusetts General Hospital or the Kraft Center for Community Health, which provided a clinician champion to lead the efforts at each community health center. The community health centers were selected for their patient demographics, as well as for their affiliation with Massachusetts General Hospital or the Kraft Center for Community Health, which provided a clinician champion to lead the efforts at each community health center. The community health centers were selected for their patient demographics, as well as for their affiliation with Massachusetts General Hospital or the Kraft Center for Community Health, which provided a clinician champion to lead the efforts at each community health center. The community health centers were selected for their patient demographics, as well as for their affiliation with Massachusetts General Hospital or the Kraft Center for Community Health, which provided a clinician champion to lead the efforts at each community health center. (1) Staff and provider training to standardize obesity prevention across early life sectors. (1) Staff and provider training to standardize obesity prevention across early life sectors. Screening surveys are distributed at check-in by front desk staff, are available in English, Spanish, Vietnamese, and Arabic, and take approximately 10–15 minutes to complete. All patients are sent a personalized resource guide by mail or email summarizing the information discussed on the phone call and any additional resources that may be of assistance to the family. Navigators make a follow up call approximately two weeks after the initial call to assess referral completion and if any further education or support resources are indicated. Calls are summarized in the EHR, enabling coordination of care across providers and programs. The First 1000 Days program was co-created by a diverse set of stakeholders working in early life clinical and public health services, including Obstetrics, Pediatrics, Adult Medicine, Behavioral Health, Nutrition, Community Health, the Women, Infants and Children (WIC) program, and the Maternal, Infant and Childhood Home Visiting program. In infancy, behavioral targets focus on healthful feeding habits, soothing techniques, age-appropriate sleep and screen time, and developmentally appropriate play and parent engagement. The First 1000 Days program created a text message library to provide additional health education and support between health center visits. Women and their partners are offered enrollment in the text message campaign during prenatal care or at the child’s 1 month well-child visit. Videos for infancy include topics such as sleep, feeding (breastfeeding, formula, and introduction of solids), hunger and satiety cues, screen time, soothing, and active time for infants. During implementation of the program components described above, modifications and enhancements were made in response to stakeholder and health center staff feedback provided as part of the Collective Impact process. The impact of the First 1000 Days program on prevention of obesity in mother-infant pairs during pregnancy and the first 2 years of infancy is strengthened by its multifactorial, systems-level approach, however these methods also create challenges for program evaluation, as there may be effects both on the entire health center population through changed systems, as well as on individual participants utilizing specific components of the program. The First 1000 Days evaluation addresses three inter-related questions: 1) Is the implementation of First 1000 Days program associated with improvements of maternal and infant obesity-related outcomes at the level of the health center population? Collective Impact (CI) is defined as “the commitment of a group of important actors from different sectors to a common agenda for solving a specific social problem” [6–8]. Clinical measures from all pregnant women and their infants who receive prenatal or pediatric care at the program’s three health centers will be compared with the same measures from two distinct populations: a retrospective comparison with mothers and infants at the same health centers just prior to the program onset, and a contemporaneous comparison of mothers and infants at two similar non-intervention Boston-area health centers. Second, we will evaluate the impact of the program on individual participants’ maternal and infant health, obesogenic health behaviors, and socio-contextual factors using a prospective cohort study design, exploring variations in intra-program participation. 