In narcolepsy patients, neither antidepressants nor stimulants were found to have significant effects on any of the features. Studies in both animals and humans have shown that rapid transitions from wake to REM sleep is a diagnostic hallmark of narcolepsy.7,15 On the basis of this finding, rapid onsets into REM sleep (latency from sleep onset to REM sleep ≤15 minutes (SOREMP)) during nocturnal PSG and during daytime napping (measured by the Multiple Sleep Latency Test (MSLT)) are used to diagnose narcolepsy.15,16 Whereas a SOREMP at night is highly specific (99%), it is only modestly sensitive (~45%) thus many patients are missed.15 It has the advantage, however, of being theoretically feasibly assessed using home recordings, and its evaluation is required prior to the MSLT to exclude sleep deprivation. In contrast, a positive MSLT (mean sleep latency (MSL) of ≤8 minutes as well as presence of ≥2 SOREMPs) is both sensitive (90–95%) and specific (95%), but time consuming and expensive. Also, the poor replication performance seen in this study might not simply be due to over-fitting in the training dataset, but also because of the different definitions of controls in the two datasets, the invertible differences in hardware equipment, hardware and software settings like sampling frequency, filters, etc. Also, the poor replication performance seen in this study might not simply be due to over-fitting in the training dataset, but also because of the different definitions of controls in the two datasets, the invertible differences in hardware equipment, hardware and software settings like sampling frequency, filters, etc. Also, the poor replication performance seen in this study might not simply be due to over-fitting in the training dataset, but also because of the different definitions of controls in the two datasets, the invertible differences in hardware equipment, hardware and software settings like sampling frequency, filters, etc. Also, the poor replication performance seen in this study might not simply be due to over-fitting in the training dataset, but also because of the different definitions of controls in the two datasets, the invertible differences in hardware equipment, hardware and software settings like sampling frequency, filters, etc. Also, the poor replication performance seen in this study might not simply be due to over-fitting in the training dataset, but also because of the different definitions of controls in the two datasets, the invertible differences in hardware equipment, hardware and software settings like sampling frequency, filters, etc. and scoring procedures across different clinics. and scoring procedures across different clinics. The decreased delta power in N1-W might reflect either a smaller delta power in N1 sleep in NC patients compared to controls and non-narcoleptics, a bigger delta power in wake in NC patients compared to controls and non-narcoleptics, or a combination of the two. The decreased delta power in N1-W might reflect either a smaller delta power in N1 sleep in NC patients compared to controls and non-narcoleptics, a bigger delta power in wake in NC patients compared to controls and non-narcoleptics, or a combination of the two. Whatever the case might be, these likely all represent sleep stage dissociation in wake and/or N1 sleep. The study suffers from a number of limitations. The study suffers from a number of limitations. In this direction, it may be that EEG surrounding brief arousals should have been excluded from the analysis, although this would not be practical in clinical practice. These datasets differ in terms of number and ratio of cases/not-cases, clinical definition of controls, age and treatment. These datasets differ in terms of number and ratio of cases/not-cases, clinical definition of controls, age and treatment. These datasets differ in terms of number and ratio of cases/not-cases, clinical definition of controls, age and treatment. These datasets differ in terms of number and ratio of cases/not-cases, clinical definition of controls, age and treatment. As other studies have shown that sleep macrostructure is also changed in NC patients with shortened REM sleep onset,12,35,36 including changes in sleep stage transitions,7,12 features that include sleep stage transition could be added to raise sensitivity further. Patients were age- and sex-matched with controls obtained from volunteers drawn from the Wisconsin Sleep Cohort; an ongoing longitudinal population-based study of sleep patterns in the general population.20 A stratified random sample of employed adults aged 30–60 years in south Wisconsin was recruited for a nocturnal PSG at baseline. Only four subjects were excluded as they have been suggested to possibly have narcolepsy in a prior study.22 A case/control ratio of 4 was used giving a total of 510 control subjects in the training dataset. Only four subjects were excluded as they have been suggested to possibly have narcolepsy in a prior study.22 A case/control ratio of 4 was used giving a total of 510 control subjects in the training dataset. Only four subjects were excluded as they have been suggested to possibly have narcolepsy in a prior study.22 A case/control ratio of 4 was used giving a total of 510 control subjects in the training dataset. Only four subjects were excluded as they have been suggested to possibly have narcolepsy in a prior study.22 A case/control ratio of 4 was used giving a total of 510 control subjects in the training dataset. The sample has been described elsewhere,15,21 and all evaluation included a comprehensive medical and medication history, nocturnal PSG and, for narcolepsy cases, a PSG-MSLT. Optimally, spectra could be extracted from automatically scored hypnograms to limit differences in scoring – both across the two standards and also across sites and scorers. This would, however, introduce new challenges as no automatic scoring method has proven to be valid in narcoleptic patients. This would, however, introduce new challenges as no automatic scoring method has proven to be valid in narcoleptic patients. To ensure minimum contamination by artifacts of the PSD spectra for each sleep stage, a set of successive cleaning procedures was followed starting with the removal of signal surrounding sleep transitions as well as signal contaminated with electromyography (EMG) artifacts.Sleep stage transitions were identified using the manually scored hypnogram as epochs going from any stage (N1, N2, N3, REM or W) to another. To ensure minimum contamination by artifacts of the PSD spectra for each sleep stage, a set of successive cleaning procedures was followed starting with the removal of signal surrounding sleep transitions as well as signal contaminated with electromyography (EMG) artifacts.Sleep stage transitions were identified using the manually scored hypnogram as epochs going from any stage (N1, N2, N3, REM or W) to another. EEG in epochs neighboring stage transitions was excluded from the analysis to minimize “mixed” stage 30 sec epochs.The entire EEG recorded at the C3-A2 derivation was passed through a muscle artifact detector described in details in Brunner et al 25 This detector is a widely used method and compares high frequency activity in each 4-s window with the activity level in a local 3-min window surrounding the 4-s window. Visual inspection of the signals and spectra showed that the notch filter had negligible effect on frequencies in a 2-Hz window around 20 Hz. This normalization approach was chosen to minimize frequency specific artifacts and because the differences between these sleep stages were thought to be the most interesting when analyzing NC.The mean spectrum of each stage and normalization was calculated, resulting in eight mean spectra (five stages from Sum=1 plus three Subtract Stage normalizations).To reduce the number of features to be included in the feature selection approach, we first compared mean spectra in NC versus controls in the various sleep stages using one-sided t-tests testing for significance for every frequency sample in the frequency range 0.5–35 Hz. Additional features computed included the sum of the sample PSD values in the standard clinical frequency bands: delta (0.5–4Hz), theta (4–8Hz), alpha (8–11Hz), sigma (11–16Hz) and beta (16–25Hz) for each of the eight mean spectra, leading to the selection of an additional 5 × 8 = 40 features and a grand total of 63 features. where I is the number of subjects, D is the dimension of the input variable, and zi states the classification output as 1 for positive cases (NC) and 0 for negative cases (non-NC). Additionally, the component values indicate each feature’s impact on the final posterior probability output, and can be used to rank the features.The training dataset was used to optimize the LASSO model applying 10-fold cross-validation, where the feature values were standardized before given as input. The performance results are seen in Table 3. As mentioned in the introduction, we elected to select cut offs that gave a high specificity (a minimum of 97%) at the expense of sensitivity. The points for the selected cut offs are marked on the ROC curves together with the optimal point when sensitivity and specificity were ranked equally. The points for the selected cut offs are marked on the ROC curves together with the optimal point when sensitivity and specificity were ranked equally. The points for the selected cut offs are marked on the ROC curves together with the optimal point when sensitivity and specificity were ranked equally. 