Virtually all clinically used drugs exhibit effects on biological targets other than those for which they were designed. In addition, these three compounds failed to elicit any response in HEK293 cells transfected with an empty vector (data not shown). Competition of [3H]CP-55,940 Binding by RaloxifeneIn order to investigate whether raloxifene bind to the CB2 receptor, we performed competition ligand binding experiments using membranes prepared from HEK293 cells stably transfected with CB2. In addition, there was no detectable level of specific [3H]CP-55,940 binding in membranes prepared from HEK293 cells transfected with an empty vector (data not shown). The benefits of drug repurposing include the existing approval by regulatory agencies for human use and the availability of human pharmacokinetics data and safety profiles for the approved drug. The benefits of drug repurposing include the existing approval by regulatory agencies for human use and the availability of human pharmacokinetics data and safety profiles for the approved drug. The benefits of drug repurposing include the existing approval by regulatory agencies for human use and the availability of human pharmacokinetics data and safety profiles for the approved drug. As a result, there is a decrease in intracellular cAMP levels which was measured as an increase in HTRF signal in this study. Since most chemical compound libraries come pre-dissolved in dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO), it is critical to determine the maximum concentration that a compound can be screened before DMSO reaches a concentration that is too high to be tolerated by the assay [12]. Therefore, we determined the effect of DMSO on the cell-based, HTRF cAMP assay. Therefore, we determined the effect of DMSO on the cell-based, HTRF cAMP assay. These results also confirmed the suitability of this cell-based, HTRF cAMP assay for testing ligands for CB2. These results also confirmed the suitability of this cell-based, HTRF cAMP assay for testing ligands for CB2. These results also confirmed the suitability of this cell-based, HTRF cAMP assay for testing ligands for CB2. In an attempt to discover novel ligands for CB2, each compound from a chemical library containing 640 FDA-approved drugs was tested for its ability to activate CB2 using the validated HTRF cAMP assay. If a compound is an agonist, it will inhibit the forskolin-stimulated cAMP response, which is shown as an increase in HTRF signal. In contrast, if a compound is an inverse agonist, it will further increase the forskolin-stimulated cAMP response, which is characterized as a decrease in HTRF signal. Similarly, raloxifene was able to compete, in a concentration-dependent manner, for specific [3H]CP-55,940 binding to CB2. These data further demonstrate that raloxifene acted on the same receptor as the cannabinoid agonist CP-55,940. Raloxifene belongs to the class of selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs), which exhibit estrogen agonist activity in some target tissues while exert estrogen antagonist activity in other tissues [14,15]. The results form the MORE trial demonstrated that raloxifene reduced the incidence of new vertebral fractures by 30% and 50% (in women with and without prevalent vertebral fractures, respectively) compared to placebo [14,15]. The biological actions of raloxifene are well known to be mediated through binding to estrogen receptors [14,15]. This initial finding prompted us to further characterize the pharmacological profile of raloxifene. 384-well, round bottom, low volume white plates were purchased from Grenier Bio One (Monroe, NC). Cultured cells were washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (8.1 mM NaH2PO4, 1.5 mM KH2PO4, 138 mM NaCl, and 2.7 mM KCl, pH 7.2), and then dissociated in phosphate-buffered saline containing 1 mM EDTA. Cultured cells were washed twice with phosphate-buffered saline (8.1 mM NaH2PO4, 1.5 mM KH2PO4, 138 mM NaCl, and 2.7 mM KCl, pH 7.2), and then dissociated in phosphate-buffered saline containing 1 mM EDTA. The cells were resuspended in cell buffer (DMEM plus 0.2 % fatty acid free bovine serum albumin) and centrifuged a second time at 2000g for 5 min at 4°C. The cells were resuspended in cell buffer (DMEM plus 0.2 % fatty acid free bovine serum albumin) and centrifuged a second time at 2000g for 5 min at 4°C. The cells were resuspended in cell buffer (DMEM plus 0.2 % fatty acid free bovine serum albumin) and centrifuged a second time at 2000g for 5 min at 4°C. Subsequently, the cells were homogenized in membrane buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 2.5 mM EDTA, pH 7.4) with a Polytron homogenizer. Subsequently, the cells were homogenized in membrane buffer (50 mM Tris–HCl, 5 mM MgCl2, 2.5 mM EDTA, pH 7.4) with a Polytron homogenizer. The bound [3H]CP55940 was determined by liquid scintillation counting in 5 ml of CytoScint liquid scintillation fluid (MP Biomedicals, Solon, Ohio, USA). The assays were performed in duplicate, and the results represent the averaged data from at least three independent experiments. The assays were performed in duplicate, and the results represent the averaged data from at least three independent experiments. The assays were performed in duplicate, and the results represent the averaged data from at least three independent experiments. Data AnalysisData analyses for cell-based HTRF cAMP assays were performed based on the ratio of fluorescence intensity of each well at 620 nm and 665 nm. Because CB2 ligands have a wide range of therapeutic potentials, many novel agonists and antagonists for CB2 receptors have been synthesized by pharmaceutical industry as well as academic laboratories [5,6]. Z′ Factor DeterminationTo determine the Z′ value, experiments were performed in 384-well plates using many replicates of the cell-based HTRF cAMP assay with positive and negative controls (Fig. For this purpose, we tested the effect of DMSO at concentrations ranging from 0.01% to 100 %. 1B, the cell-based HTRF cAMP assay for CB2 can tolerate DMSO up to 1 % without any loss of signal. 1B, the cell-based HTRF cAMP assay for CB2 can tolerate DMSO up to 1 % without any loss of signal. 