Search Strategy and Selection CriteriaWe carried out a literature search in MEDLINE (via PubMed), SciELO and LILACS using the terms norovirus* OR calicivirus* AND “country.” We carried out the search individually for each Latin American country following the list of Pan American Health Organization membership nations.14 There were no language limitations or other filters applied to the search. This could have overestimated the prevalence of norovirus infection among AGE cases if winter months were over-represented, although we think this is unlikely since only 8 out of the 29 studies included had recruitments that were not multiples of 12 months. More studies are needed to fully define the burden of norovirus infection in terms of total cases, medical care-seeking and attributable deaths in children and, especially, in adults, for whom data are very scarce. In addition, information was collected on the rotavirus vaccine introduction status of the country at the time of the data collection.15 When available, the data were stratified by age group and location for those studies reporting data for more than one age group and/or location, as well as by rotavirus vaccine introduction status.All norovirus-positive samples were included even in the presence of other pathogens to avoid introducing a bias when comparing with studies that tested only for norovirus and in which coinfection with other pathogens was not assessed. For studies that assessed norovirus only among samples negative for other pathogens, we considered the total number of samples tested as denominator.We stratified data into 4 different locations as a proxy for severity: community, outpatient, hospital (including emergency department visits) and other/not specified (for studies that did not specify location or where data were given for more than one location without stratification or other locations, eg, day care centers). We excluded 217 records after title and abstract screening for not being related to the purpose of this review. We excluded 217 records after title and abstract screening for not being related to the purpose of this review. A further 3 records were excluded because it was not possible to obtain the full text online. Prevalence of Norovirus Infection Among AGE CasesWe identified 29 studies providing data on the prevalence of norovirus disease from 11 countries. A recent review estimated that 24% of all community AGE cases, 20% of those attending outpatient clinics with AGE and 17% of those hospitalized for AGE are associated with norovirus.3 In the US alone, it is estimated that 20 million cases occur every year resulting in 71,000 hospitalizations, 400,000 emergency room visits and 1.8 million primary care visits.4 A recent review estimated that 24% of all community AGE cases, 20% of those attending outpatient clinics with AGE and 17% of those hospitalized for AGE are associated with norovirus.3 In the US alone, it is estimated that 20 million cases occur every year resulting in 71,000 hospitalizations, 400,000 emergency room visits and 1.8 million primary care visits.4 A recent review estimated that 24% of all community AGE cases, 20% of those attending outpatient clinics with AGE and 17% of those hospitalized for AGE are associated with norovirus.3 In the US alone, it is estimated that 20 million cases occur every year resulting in 71,000 hospitalizations, 400,000 emergency room visits and 1.8 million primary care visits.4 )All 29 studies were included in the meta-analysis to estimate the pooled prevalence of norovirus infection among AGE cases. Incidence of Norovirus-associated AGEThree studies from 3 different countries provided data on the incidence of norovirus disease. The overall norovirus AGE incidence in these studies ranged from 17 to 23 cases of norovirus disease per 100 person-years (A26, A27) (see Table 3). Prevalence of Norovirus Infection Among Asymptomatic SubjectsWe found 13 studies providing data on the prevalence of asymptomatic norovirus infection from 6 countries, with data collected between 1989 and 2012. Among norovirus GII infections, over 90% were caused by non-GII.4 genotypes (A11, A16).The 13 studies were included in the meta-analysis. The overall prevalence of norovirus infection among AGE cases in Latin America is in line with a recent global systematic review and meta-analysis of noroviruses, which found noroviruses to be associated with 18% of AGE cases.3 While the general design of our review is similar to the one by Ahmed et al,3 there are some important differences: we did not stratify per development index or strain year, and the scope of our review is wider, including not only the prevalence of norovirus but also incidence, seroepidemiology and outbreaks. Recent studies from Finland, the US and Nicaragua have shown an increase in the prevalence of norovirus after the introduction of rotavirus vaccination in those countries.10,11,20 We did not see a pattern of increasing norovirus prevalence in locations with rotavirus vaccination. The community incidence of norovirus AGE among children less than 5 years of age ranged from 17 to 23 cases per 100 person-years. Like in most studies elsewhere, GII was dominant compared with GI in Latin America, with GII associated with over 75% of norovirus AGE cases. Novel GII.4 variants emerge globally every 2–4 years, apparently in response to population immunity.27 Increases of norovirus disease activity have been reported from a number of countries, most clearly in March 2002 and July 2006, though it would be unlikely to detect such an impact in a nonsensitive literature review as conducted here, where studies typically covered many seasons. 