The main emergent themes relevant to competence are described elsewhere (Tan et al , 2003a). In this article, two specific areas will be considered in detail: Difficulties in Thinking; and Changes in Values. So you stop eating and exercise to try to lose weight, and once you’ve lost a lot of weight, your thought processes are all muddled anyway, so you can’t be clear to think what you are doing isn’t useful, so you actually don’t want to have help.” (Participant J)3Interviewer: Tell me a bit more about those muddled thoughts. And I will never, ever be convinced that they don’t.” (Mother G)8“I only know from H, you hear of the stories of people with anorexia, I know from H’s side, that I think, just talking to her, she’s very focused, she knows the damage she’s doing. And I will never, ever be convinced that they don’t.” (Mother G)8“I only know from H, you hear of the stories of people with anorexia, I know from H’s side, that I think, just talking to her, she’s very focused, she knows the damage she’s doing. And I will never, ever be convinced that they don’t.” (Mother G)8“I only know from H, you hear of the stories of people with anorexia, I know from H’s side, that I think, just talking to her, she’s very focused, she knows the damage she’s doing. For this participant, the disbelief stemmed in her rejection of the fact that she did not believe that she was too thin. “Not to me.” That’s the opinion of doctors, and I wonder why you don’t think it can happen to you. When I’m just going around doing whatever in the day, then I don’t feel that I’ve got a problem. But the way you feel is that you’re normal weight? But also at that point it was a very focused and not very happy life so to be honest I also didn’t care.” (Participant C) (Note: 1 stone = 14 lb = 6.4 kg).13“She says, when she looks in the mirror, she knows she’s desperately thin. But also at that point it was a very focused and not very happy life so to be honest I also didn’t care.” (Participant C) (Note: 1 stone = 14 lb = 6.4 kg).13“She says, when she looks in the mirror, she knows she’s desperately thin. But also at that point it was a very focused and not very happy life so to be honest I also didn’t care.” (Participant C) (Note: 1 stone = 14 lb = 6.4 kg).13“She says, when she looks in the mirror, she knows she’s desperately thin. But also at that point it was a very focused and not very happy life so to be honest I also didn’t care.” (Participant C) (Note: 1 stone = 14 lb = 6.4 kg).13“She says, when she looks in the mirror, she knows she’s desperately thin. But also at that point it was a very focused and not very happy life so to be honest I also didn’t care.” (Participant C) (Note: 1 stone = 14 lb = 6.4 kg).13“She says, when she looks in the mirror, she knows she’s desperately thin. But she said when she looks at the photographs, then she knows how ill she looks.” (Mother F)(c) External influences on thinkingAs seen in the discussion above, low weight was seen as contributing to difficulties with concentration and reasoning. But she said when she looks at the photographs, then she knows how ill she looks.” (Mother F)(c) External influences on thinkingAs seen in the discussion above, low weight was seen as contributing to difficulties with concentration and reasoning. But she said when she looks at the photographs, then she knows how ill she looks.” (Mother F)(c) External influences on thinkingAs seen in the discussion above, low weight was seen as contributing to difficulties with concentration and reasoning. But she said when she looks at the photographs, then she knows how ill she looks.” (Mother F)(c) External influences on thinkingAs seen in the discussion above, low weight was seen as contributing to difficulties with concentration and reasoning. But she said when she looks at the photographs, then she knows how ill she looks.” (Mother F)(c) External influences on thinkingAs seen in the discussion above, low weight was seen as contributing to difficulties with concentration and reasoning. But as soon as I was in a place where I was in control and choice and everything then I just wanted was to be healthy and the figures weren’t so relevant, it was how I felt and stuff. But as soon as I was in a place where I was in control and choice and everything then I just wanted was to be healthy and the figures weren’t so relevant, it was how I felt and stuff. The results of the MacCAT-T test will be considered, along with the participants’ views on two main themes: difficulties in thinking and values. The accounts of the participants suggest that their ability to make decisions, as well as the choices that they make, can be affected by the actions of the professionals treating them, in particular with regard to restriction or freedom of choice. The accounts of the participants suggest that their ability to make decisions, as well as the choices that they make, can be affected by the actions of the professionals treating them, in particular with regard to restriction or freedom of choice. The accounts of the participants suggest that their ability to make decisions, as well as the choices that they make, can be affected by the actions of the professionals treating them, in particular with regard to restriction or freedom of choice. The accounts of the participants suggest that their ability to make decisions, as well as the choices that they make, can be affected by the actions of the professionals treating them, in particular with regard to restriction or freedom of choice. This issue has been explored in greater detail elsewhere (Tan et al , 2003b). This issue has been explored in greater detail elsewhere (Tan et al , 2003b). This issue has been explored in greater detail elsewhere (Tan et al , 2003b). There were several ways in which this appeared to occur. Several participants pointed out that people could be large framed or very muscular, and therefore legitimately over the normal weight range. Several participants pointed out that people could be large framed or very muscular, and therefore legitimately over the normal weight range. What would it say about you? What would it say about you? What would it say about you? What would it say about you? But if someone is happy with how they look then they should be allowed to look that way.” Interviewer: So it sounds like for you the rules are different, that it isn’t ok for you to be fat. I wonder what it means to you to be fat. This is explained by the common finding of depressed mood and low self-esteem amongst patients who have anorexia nervosa (Kennedy et al , 1994). This is explained by the common finding of depressed mood and low self-esteem amongst patients who have anorexia nervosa (Kennedy et al , 1994). This is explained by the common finding of depressed mood and low self-esteem amongst patients who have anorexia nervosa (Kennedy et al , 1994). This is explained by the common finding of depressed mood and low self-esteem amongst patients who have anorexia nervosa (Kennedy et al , 1994). This is explained by the common finding of depressed mood and low self-esteem amongst patients who have anorexia nervosa (Kennedy et al , 1994). However, the value attached to life was less than it might have otherwise been, and this made the risk of death from the disorder less of a motivator for these people to get well than might be hoped by mental health professionals warning them of the risks.21Interviewer: Were you afraid of dying or not afraid of dying? “Well, if she wasn’t here, if she was still at home, to be quite honest she’d be dead by now, she just so wants to be thin.” Interviewer: So do you think she would be willing to practically kill herself, well, literally kill herself for it? She’s not going to die, she says that, “I won’t die”. “I think it means she’s different.” Right. “I think it means she’s different.” Right. One key concept in the ethical and legal analysis relating to compulsory treatment is that of capacity to consent to, and refuse, treatment (Kennedy & Grubb, 2000). She comes home for lunch, no one else is allowed to. She comes home for lunch, no one else is allowed to. I can’t imagine that I thought it, it felt like really quite an accomplishment!.. And knowing I almost killed myself; no, I’d say the illness almost killed me, it was like, wow. On this view, compulsory treatment is only justified if the patient lacks capacity (and the treatment is in the patient’s best interests). ...I can remember when I had difficulty walking upstairs, or I had such pain bending down, at the back of my legs, and I loved it, I used to bend down as much as I could to feel the pain! And I felt so in control.” Interviewer: I wonder if it was also like risk-taking; like some people, say a sportsman who jumps out of a plane with a parachute, get a real buzz. And I felt so in control.” Interviewer: I wonder if it was also like risk-taking; like some people, say a sportsman who jumps out of a plane with a parachute, get a real buzz. And I felt so in control.” Interviewer: I wonder if it was also like risk-taking; like some people, say a sportsman who jumps out of a plane with a parachute, get a real buzz. And I felt so in control.” Interviewer: I wonder if it was also like risk-taking; like some people, say a sportsman who jumps out of a plane with a parachute, get a real buzz. And I felt so in control.” Interviewer: I wonder if it was also like risk-taking; like some people, say a sportsman who jumps out of a plane with a parachute, get a real buzz. I go in to help at the school, and you see the happy children, and they’re carefree, and now K isn’t care free, nothing she does is care free. “No.” What does your anorexia nervosa mean to you? “No.” What does your anorexia nervosa mean to you? “No.” What does your anorexia nervosa mean to you? “No.” What does your anorexia nervosa mean to you? Due to the size of this study, there has been no attempt to include males in this study, although they do account for up to ten percent of clinical cases (Royal College of Psychiatrists, 1992). These include difficulties with concentration, muddled thinking, ambiguity of belief, and external influences. In statute law, the new Mental Capacity Act received Royal Assent on 7th April 2005 and will be coming into force in the near future in England and Wales. This will provide the first statutory explication of capacity in English law 4. Capacity plays the key role within English common law (although not within the Mental Health Act) in answering the question of whether beneficial treatment can be imposed on a patient who is refusing it. One important aspect of both English and US law is that a decision, however foolish it appears to others, is not by itself evidence of lack of capacity 5. Such a position is tenable as long as there is no doubt about the competence of the patient. Such a position is tenable as long as there is no doubt about the competence of the patient. Such a position is tenable as long as there is no doubt about the competence of the patient. No assessment is required unless there is some cause to doubt the person’s competence. Grisso and Appelbaum, although basing their analysis on legal precedents, go further than English (or US) law in their analysis of competence through introducing the notion of ‘appreciation’ in the MacCAT-T instrument (Grisso & Appelbaum, 1998b). Grisso and Appelbaum, however, in their further analysis of the concept of appreciation include aspects that go beyond the facts and understanding relevant to the specific decision and include the wider belief systems of the patient. Grisso and Appelbaum’s appreciation criterion provides a way of finding this patient incompetent. It could plausibly be argued that she has a belief (that she is worthless) that is a considerable distortion of reality, it is caused by impaired affect (her depression), and this belief results in her decision (to refuse treatment). Such a belief is essentially a value, not a false view of reality. They suggest that, in addition to abilities to understand, communicate, reason, and deliberate, a competent decision-maker also requires a set of values or conceptions of the good which is at least minimally consistent, stable, and affirmed as her own (Buchanan & Brock, 1989). They suggest that, in addition to abilities to understand, communicate, reason, and deliberate, a competent decision-maker also requires a set of values or conceptions of the good which is at least minimally consistent, stable, and affirmed as her own (Buchanan & Brock, 1989). Some participants, including mothers who may be viewed as more objective with respect to their daughters’ limitations, expressed the opinion that there was no impairment in the reasoning of anorexia nervosa sufferers, even at low weights. One common argument that relates to efficacy is that it is harder, if not impossible, to engage patients in psychological therapies if their treatment is compulsory (Dresser, 1984; Rathner, 1998). Salient beliefs are beliefs about whether the facts apply to oneself. Thus several people in this sample reported believing that severe weight loss is dangerous but not believing that such danger applied to themselves, even though they accepted that they had lost weight. Thus several people in this sample reported believing that severe weight loss is dangerous but not believing that such danger applied to themselves, even though they accepted that they had lost weight. Thus several people in this sample reported believing that severe weight loss is dangerous but not believing that such danger applied to themselves, even though they accepted that they had lost weight. Refusal to maintain body weight at or above a minimally normal weight for age and height (eg, weight loss leading to maintenance of body weight less than 85% of that expected or failure to make expected weight gain during period of growth, leading to body weight less than 85% of that expected).Intense fear of gaining weight or becoming fat, even though underweight.Disturbance in the way in which one's body weight or shape is experienced, undue influence of body weight or shape on self-evaluation, or denial of the seriousness of the current low body weight.In postmenarchal females, amenorrhea i.e., the absence of at least three consecutive cycles. Refusal to maintain body weight at or above a minimally normal weight for age and height (eg, weight loss leading to maintenance of body weight less than 85% of that expected or failure to make expected weight gain during period of growth, leading to body weight less than 85% of that expected).Intense fear of gaining weight or becoming fat, even though underweight.Disturbance in the way in which one's body weight or shape is experienced, undue influence of body weight or shape on self-evaluation, or denial of the seriousness of the current low body weight.In postmenarchal females, amenorrhea i.e., the absence of at least three consecutive cycles. This results in giving the dangers of the weight loss relatively little importance in decision-making despite understanding and believing them. Does Charland and Freedman’s approach provide a way of finding the person with anorexia nervosa incompetent without opening the way to an excessive interference with freedoms? Does Charland and Freedman’s approach provide a way of finding the person with anorexia nervosa incompetent without opening the way to an excessive interference with freedoms? Does Charland and Freedman’s approach provide a way of finding the person with anorexia nervosa incompetent without opening the way to an excessive interference with freedoms? The normal but risk taking teenagers who, while accepting the risks feel somehow privileged and at less danger themselves, might pass this third criterion because this is understood as normal and thus justified. There is however a major problem in relying on this third, external ‘reasonableness’ criterion. There is however a major problem in relying on this third, external ‘reasonableness’ criterion. It also opens the door to assessing as incompetent those whom we think are making inappropriate decisions, for instance already attractive individuals placing themselves at unnecessary physical risk and pain by undergoing cosmetic surgery in order to correct small physical imperfections. If we understand him correctly, Charland makes use of the concept of ‘pathological value’ without also relying on the idea of inauthentic value (Charland, 2001). If we understand him correctly, Charland makes use of the concept of ‘pathological value’ without also relying on the idea of inauthentic value (Charland, 2001). If we understand him correctly, Charland makes use of the concept of ‘pathological value’ without also relying on the idea of inauthentic value (Charland, 2001). If we understand him correctly, Charland makes use of the concept of ‘pathological value’ without also relying on the idea of inauthentic value (Charland, 2001). If we understand him correctly, Charland makes use of the concept of ‘pathological value’ without also relying on the idea of inauthentic value (Charland, 2001). If we understand him correctly, Charland makes use of the concept of ‘pathological value’ without also relying on the idea of inauthentic value (Charland, 2001). Some of the study participants, for example, explained that they understood the risks that they were running, but that the importance of being thin made the risks relatively unimportant and therefore not sufficiently motivating for them to seek treatment. Fatness was considered by the study participants to have many specific meanings which rendered it a highly undesirable state. Fatness was considered by the study participants to have many specific meanings which rendered it a highly undesirable state. This has been recognised in more recent treatment approaches by mental health professionals, who now use strategies such as motivational interviewing techniques to help ambivalent patients persuade themselves that the advantages of recovery outweigh the disadvantages (Treasure & Ward, 1997; Vitousek et al , 1998). Finally, the issue of personal identity is a particularly difficult problem, as the sense of one’s own personal identity involves a collection of values and attitudes. Finally, the issue of personal identity is a particularly difficult problem, as the sense of one’s own personal identity involves a collection of values and attitudes. The dilemma posed by the issue of personal identity in anorexia nervosa is explored further in a separate article (Tan et al , 2003c). The dilemma posed by the issue of personal identity in anorexia nervosa is explored further in a separate article (Tan et al , 2003c). The dilemma posed by the issue of personal identity in anorexia nervosa is explored further in a separate article (Tan et al , 2003c). The dilemma posed by the issue of personal identity in anorexia nervosa is explored further in a separate article (Tan et al , 2003c). The dilemma posed by the issue of personal identity in anorexia nervosa is explored further in a separate article (Tan et al , 2003c). The dilemma posed by the issue of personal identity in anorexia nervosa is explored further in a separate article (Tan et al , 2003c). An Empirical Study of Competence to Refuse Treatment in Anorexia Nervosa There were many themes which emerged which were relevant to competence. In this paper, we will specifically focus in the areas of thinking processes and values, and discuss the outcome of the MacCAT-T as compared to the accounts of the young women and their mothers in these areas. This age range was chosen to collect data across the age milestones of rights to consent and legal majority in English law, which occur at 16 years and 18 years respectively 2. This age range was chosen to collect data across the age milestones of rights to consent and legal majority in English law, which occur at 16 years and 18 years respectively 2. This age range was chosen to collect data across the age milestones of rights to consent and legal majority in English law, which occur at 16 years and 18 years respectively 2. Most of the participants were in treatment and were at a range of stages of illness severity and recovery when interviewed. The participants’ body mass indices (BMI) ranged from 12.57 (a dangerously severe weight deficit) to 19.62 (just below normal limits), with a median BMI of 17.10. This is so characteristic of the disorder that it is described in the DSM-IV, immediately following the list of criteria given above, as follows: “The individual is often brought to professional attention by family members after marked weight loss (or failure to make expected weight gains) has occurred. The median scores for the participants as a group were within the clinical range for the Beck Depression and Anxiety Inventories, and within the eating disordered range for the Eating Disorder Examination and Eating Attitudes Test. The median scores for the participants as a group were within the clinical range for the Beck Depression and Anxiety Inventories, and within the eating disordered range for the Eating Disorder Examination and Eating Attitudes Test. The median scores for the participants as a group were within the clinical range for the Beck Depression and Anxiety Inventories, and within the eating disordered range for the Eating Disorder Examination and Eating Attitudes Test. The median scores for the participants as a group were within the clinical range for the Beck Depression and Anxiety Inventories, and within the eating disordered range for the Eating Disorder Examination and Eating Attitudes Test. The participants with anorexia nervosa scored well on the MacCAT-T test of competence, exhibiting excellent understanding, reasoning and ability to express choice, with generally high scores in each category. The participants with anorexia nervosa scored well on the MacCAT-T test of competence, exhibiting excellent understanding, reasoning and ability to express choice, with generally high scores in each category. The participants with anorexia nervosa scored well on the MacCAT-T test of competence, exhibiting excellent understanding, reasoning and ability to express choice, with generally high scores in each category. The participants with anorexia nervosa scored well on the MacCAT-T test of competence, exhibiting excellent understanding, reasoning and ability to express choice, with generally high scores in each category. The participants with anorexia nervosa scored well on the MacCAT-T test of competence, exhibiting excellent understanding, reasoning and ability to express choice, with generally high scores in each category. The participants with anorexia nervosa scored well on the MacCAT-T test of competence, exhibiting excellent understanding, reasoning and ability to express choice, with generally high scores in each category. The scores of this participant group were comparable with the normal control groups used by Grisso and Appelbaum in their studies (Grisso & Appelbaum, 1995; Grisso & Appelbaum, 1998a; Grisso et al , 1995). 