In addition, the success of AAV-based gene therapies, especially those requiring systemic delivery, can be hindered by the presence of neutralizing AAV capsid antibodies in the human population37-39. In addition, the success of AAV-based gene therapies, especially those requiring systemic delivery, can be hindered by the presence of neutralizing AAV capsid antibodies in the human population37-39. 6), these data suggest that while both AAV-PHP vectors more efficiently associate with the brain vasculature, they may differ in subsequent cell type-specific entry or transport step(s). Such in vivo-in silico selection approaches should increase the power of CREATE to enhance gene transfer to the CNS and other difficult-to-target cell populations. Such in vivo-in silico selection approaches should increase the power of CREATE to enhance gene transfer to the CNS and other difficult-to-target cell populations. Such in vivo-in silico selection approaches should increase the power of CREATE to enhance gene transfer to the CNS and other difficult-to-target cell populations. Such in vivo-in silico selection approaches should increase the power of CREATE to enhance gene transfer to the CNS and other difficult-to-target cell populations. This sequence was modified to remove a unique EarI restriction site and insert a unique KpnI site (both silent mutations) to create the xE fragment. ssAAV-CAG-mNeGreen-f refers to ssAAV-CAG-mNeonGreen-f-WPRE with a human growth hormone polyA signal. The mNeonGreen44 was modified with the membrane targeting (farnesylation and palmitoylation signals) sequence from c-Ha-Ras45. The reaction products were then treated with Plasmid Safe (PS) DNase (Epicentre; E3105K) to digest any unassembled fragments and purified using a QIAquick PCR Purification Kit (Qiagen). For this purpose, we modified an AAV2/9 rep-cap plasmid to eliminate capsid protein expression by inserting in-frame stop codons within the reading frame for each capsid protein, VP1-3 (Fig. Viral media was concentrated by precipitation with 8% polyethylene glycol 8000 (Sigma-Aldrich) with 500 mM sodium chloride47, resuspended in Tris-MgCl2, and then added to the lysates. The combined stocks were then adjusted to 500 mM NaCl, incubated at 37°C for 30 minutes, and clarified by centrifugation at 2000 × g. The clarified stocks were then purified over iodixanol (Optiprep, Sigma; D1556) step gradients (15%, 25%, 40% and 60%)48. Seven to eight days post-injection, mice were euthanized and the brain and spinal cord were collected. Vector DNA was recovered from one hemisphere of the brain and half of the spinal cord using 4-5 ml of Trizol (Life Technologies; 15596). Vector DNA was recovered from one hemisphere of the brain and half of the spinal cord using 4-5 ml of Trizol (Life Technologies; 15596). To purify viral DNA, the upper aqueous fraction was collected according to the manufacturer's extraction protocol. This split rAAV-Cap-in-cis-lox genome and Rep-AAP AAV helper system efficiently generates rAAV (Fig. This split rAAV-Cap-in-cis-lox genome and Rep-AAP AAV helper system efficiently generates rAAV (Fig. The novel AAV Rep-Cap variants, or AAV2/9 Rep-Cap as a control, were then evaluated using one of the reporter genomes described above. The novel AAV Rep-Cap variants, or AAV2/9 Rep-Cap as a control, were then evaluated using one of the reporter genomes described above. The novel AAV Rep-Cap variants, or AAV2/9 Rep-Cap as a control, were then evaluated using one of the reporter genomes described above. Vector genomes were detected using PCR primers that bind to the WPRE element and were normalized to mouse genomes using primers specific to the mouse glucagon gene. IHC was performed on floating sections with primary and secondary antibodies in PBS containing 10% goat or donkey serum and 0.5% Triton X-100 (no detergent was used for GAD67 staining). Primary antibodies incubations were performed for 16-24 hrs at RT. For some images, the 16-bit green channel (GFP) gamma was adjusted to enable visualization (without oversaturation) of both low and high GFP-expressing cells present within the same field of view. For some images, the 16-bit green channel (GFP) gamma was adjusted to enable visualization (without oversaturation) of both low and high GFP-expressing cells present within the same field of view. For some images, the 16-bit green channel (GFP) gamma was adjusted to enable visualization (without oversaturation) of both low and high GFP-expressing cells present within the same field of view. For some images, the 16-bit green channel (GFP) gamma was adjusted to enable visualization (without oversaturation) of both low and high GFP-expressing cells present within the same field of view. 3D MIP images and Supplementary Movies were generated with Imaris (Bitplane). 3D MIP images and Supplementary Movies were generated with Imaris (Bitplane). The number of animals per group was pre-established; no animals were excluded from the analysis. Tissue clearingMice were perfused as above with 60-80 mL of ice-cold 4% PFA in PB at a flow rate of 14 mL per minute. The mice were then placed in individual custom-built chambers24 and perfused with 200 mL of recycling RT 4% acrylamide in PB at 2-3 mL/min overnight followed by a 2-hr perfusion flush with PB to remove residual polymers/monomers from the vasculature. Generation of cortical spheroids from human iPSCHuman cortical spheroids were generated from iPSC as previously described31. Briefly, iPSC lines derived from two healthy control individuals were grown on inactivated mouse embryonic fibroblast feeders in the following medium: DMEM/F12, Knockout Serum 20%, 1 mM non-essential amino acids (1:100), GlutaMax (1:200), β-mercaptoethanol (0.1 mM), penicillin and streptomycin (1:100) (Life Technologies). From day 43 onwards, cortical spheroids were maintained in NPC medium, which was changed every 4 days. Cells were plated on poly-ornithine and laminin coated glass coverslip (15 mm) at ~300,000 cells/well and maintained in NPC media supplemented with BDNF (20 ng/ml) and NT3 (20 ng/ml) for the first 24 hrs, and then maintained in NPC media without growth factors.Cultures grown on coverslips were infected with each of the viruses at a titer of 1×109 vg/well and fixed 5 days later with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 10 min. Cells were plated on poly-ornithine and laminin coated glass coverslip (15 mm) at ~300,000 cells/well and maintained in NPC media supplemented with BDNF (20 ng/ml) and NT3 (20 ng/ml) for the first 24 hrs, and then maintained in NPC media without growth factors.Cultures grown on coverslips were infected with each of the viruses at a titer of 1×109 vg/well and fixed 5 days later with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) for 10 min. The proportion of GFP+ cells co-labeled with either GFAP or MAP2 was quantified in images of 10 random fields per coverslip for each experimental condition. After the second selection, several variants were enriched (Supplementary Table 2) and showed enhanced CNS transduction (Supplementary Fig. Using PARS-based CLARITY for whole body tissue clearing24, we imaged native eGFP fluorescence through cleared sections of tissue from the spinal cord (Fig. Encouragingly, the transduction efficiency of rAAVs can be enhanced by creating AAV capsid libraries and selecting for variants with more desirable characteristics8-13. Outside the CNS, the cellular level tropism of AAV-PHP.B and AAV9 appeared similar in several organs, with the exception of the pancreas where the efficiency of transduction by AAV-PHP.B was reduced as compared with AAV9 (Fig. AAV-PHP.B provided significantly greater gene transfer than AAV9 to each of the CNS regions examined: cortex (40-fold), striatum (92-fold), thalamus (76-fold), cerebellum (41-fold) and spinal cord (75-fold). Vector genome biodistribution outside the CNS showed that AAV-PHP.B transferred genes to the pancreas and adrenal gland less efficiently than AAV9 (Fig. In contrast, AAV9-mediated gene transfer to each of the examined CNS regions was at least 120-fold lower than in the liver. In contrast, AAV9-mediated gene transfer to each of the examined CNS regions was at least 120-fold lower than in the liver. Therefore, although the tropism of AAV-PHP.B is not CNS specific, the enhanced gene transfer characteristics of this vector are CNS specific. To meet these needs, we devised CREATE—a Cre recombination-dependent approach to selectively recover capsids that transduce predefined Cre expressing target cell populations (Fig. To meet these needs, we devised CREATE—a Cre recombination-dependent approach to selectively recover capsids that transduce predefined Cre expressing target cell populations (Fig. To meet these needs, we devised CREATE—a Cre recombination-dependent approach to selectively recover capsids that transduce predefined Cre expressing target cell populations (Fig. In all cases, AAV-PHP.B provided significantly enhanced transduction as compared to the same dose of AAV9. Notably, AAV-PHP.B also transduced over 94% of Chat+ motor neurons throughout the spinal cord (Fig. 4a-d), as well as reduced tropism for the liver (Fig. HiPSC lines from two individuals were differentiated into 3D cerebral cortex-like structures (cortical spheroids), and maintained in vitro for up to 200 days. Aged cortical spheroids contain superficial and deep layer cortical excitatory neurons and up to 20% astrocytes31. Aged cortical spheroids contain superficial and deep layer cortical excitatory neurons and up to 20% astrocytes31. In addition, all three viruses were capable of transducing intact 3D cortical spheroids (Supplementary Fig. In addition, all three viruses were capable of transducing intact 3D cortical spheroids (Supplementary Fig. 