We, therefore, performed WGS on LUAD samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) cohort that had appeared in previous analyses to lack an RTK/RAS/RAF pathway-activating alteration (Campbell et al , 2016). Variants called by only one of the three callers were filtered out. Variants called by only one of the three callers were filtered out. Variants were annotated for their effect (non-synonymous coding, nonsense, etc.) Variants were annotated for their effect (non-synonymous coding, nonsense, etc.) GISTIC 2.0 (Mermel et al , 2011) was used to identify significant SCNAs using copy number segments generated by Titan (Ha et al , 2014). High-level amplification was defined by log2-transformed copy number ratios > 1. Reads with based quality and mapping quality lower than 30 were removed.Identification of structural variations and genome graph reconstructionsSomatic aberrant junctions (i.e., pairs of strand-specific disconnected loci that form neo-adjacencies in the cancer genome) were identified by SvABA v1.1.3 (Wala et al , 2018), using the default setting for tumor-normal pairs. We then used JaBbA, a junction balance analysis (Hadi et al , 2020) to reconstruct a genome graph for each sample through the application of a maximum likelihood model to high-resolution binned (200bp) normalized read depth and unfiltered SvABA junctions (after exclusion of small (< 1kbp) deletion-like junctions). Subsequently, we used Circular Binary Segmentation (Olshen et al , 2004) with alpha parameter at 1×10−5 to derive a primary segmentation for each sample. The affine mapping between read depth signal and integer copy number is dictated by the hyperparameters ploidy and purity. The affine mapping between read depth signal and integer copy number is dictated by the hyperparameters ploidy and purity. To maximize statistical power, we only considered the variant types that can be detected both through WES and WGS, and compared the frequency of alteration in the RPA(–)G group (N = 57) to the rest of all the TCGA LUAD samples with WES-based variant calls from the PanCanAtlas (N = 411, https://api.gdc.cancer.gov/data/1c8cfe5f-e52d-41ba-94da-f15ea1337efc). To maximize statistical power, we only considered the variant types that can be detected both through WES and WGS, and compared the frequency of alteration in the RPA(–)G group (N = 57) to the rest of all the TCGA LUAD samples with WES-based variant calls from the PanCanAtlas (N = 411, https://api.gdc.cancer.gov/data/1c8cfe5f-e52d-41ba-94da-f15ea1337efc). To maximize statistical power, we only considered the variant types that can be detected both through WES and WGS, and compared the frequency of alteration in the RPA(–)G group (N = 57) to the rest of all the TCGA LUAD samples with WES-based variant calls from the PanCanAtlas (N = 411, https://api.gdc.cancer.gov/data/1c8cfe5f-e52d-41ba-94da-f15ea1337efc). Same method was used for clinical or molecular features, including smoking history, age of diagnosis, leukocyte fraction, genome doubling, degree of aneuploidy, genetic ancestry, primary disease stage (data available through GDC) using Fisher’s exact test or Wilcoxon’s Rank test. Briefly, SCISSOR is a statistical method for unsupervised screening of a range of structural alterations in RNA-seq data including alternative splicing, intron retention, de novo splice sites, intra-/intergenic deletions, and alternative transcription start/termination. To identify such profile shape changes, it quantifies the level of abnormality of each sample using a projection depth approach (Dang and Serfling, 2010; Donoho and Gasko, 1992) and then uses the statistics from the cohort to detect and rank shape outliers. This process confirmed the effects of focal, exon deletions on RNA transcripts.Recurrence analysis of genomic alterationsA gamma-Poisson regression framework (fishHook) that takes into account different confounders that affect the mutation count in a population was used (Imielinski et al , 2017). QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSISAll statistical tests are carried out using R (v3.6.1) and Bioconductor (v3.10) and listed within the figure legends and Results. Re-examination of the WES data for those samples confirmed the mutation calls for 16/20 samples, but the read support was insufficient to enable high-confidence variant calling without invoking the WGS information (Figures 1C and S1B). Re-examination of the WES data for those samples confirmed the mutation calls for 16/20 samples, but the read support was insufficient to enable high-confidence variant calling without invoking the WGS information (Figures 1C and S1B). Re-examination of the WES data for those samples confirmed the mutation calls for 16/20 samples, but the read support was insufficient to enable high-confidence variant calling without invoking the WGS information (Figures 1C and S1B). Lung adenocarcinoma (LUAD) is the most common lung malignancy and a leading cause of cancer death in the United States (Siegel et al , 2019). Further classification of complex SVs showed that the EGFR amplification was driven by a breakage-fusion-bridge cycle (BFBC) (Figure 1D). The focal deletion (379-bp length) in NF1 affected only a single exon that is not well represented in WES or RNA-seq, highlighting the advantage of WGS for the identification of focal SV events (Table S2). We labeled the remaining 57 cases as RPA(–)G LUADs because they lacked an RTK/RAS/RAF pathway alteration identified by WGS (as well as WES and RNA-seq). The algorithm uses a gamma Poisson regression background model (Imielinski et al , 2017) correcting for known covariates of LUAD mutation density (e.g., chromatin state, replication timing, GC content; method details). Recurrent non-coding alterations in RPA(–)G LUADsWe next asked whether the RPA(–)G cases harbored novel SNVs or indels outside the coding genome. We used the FunSeq2 method to annotate the sequence motifs bound by transcription factors (Fu et al , 2014). We used the FunSeq2 method to annotate the sequence motifs bound by transcription factors (Fu et al , 2014). Analysis of subgraphs (https://github.com/mskilab/gGnome) in those graphs identified multiple instances of complex amplicons (18 double minute, 5 BFBC, 5 tyfonas, 52 pyrgo), as well as simple duplications (mean = 16.3 per sample; Figure 4A). Analysis of subgraphs (https://github.com/mskilab/gGnome) in those graphs identified multiple instances of complex amplicons (18 double minute, 5 BFBC, 5 tyfonas, 52 pyrgo), as well as simple duplications (mean = 16.3 per sample; Figure 4A). Like extrachromosomal circular DNA segments, double minutes do not segregate symmetrically; thus, their dosage per cell is exquisitely responsive to selection pressure (Verhaak et al , 2019; Wu et al , 2019). We found that this double minute fused and amplified multiple focal regions on chromosome 13 spanning 1.0 Mbp and resulted in the high-level gain (>10 copies) of 3 intact genes (UBL3, SOX21, and LIG4). We found that this double minute fused and amplified multiple focal regions on chromosome 13 spanning 1.0 Mbp and resulted in the high-level gain (>10 copies) of 3 intact genes (UBL3, SOX21, and LIG4). We found that this double minute fused and amplified multiple focal regions on chromosome 13 spanning 1.0 Mbp and resulted in the high-level gain (>10 copies) of 3 intact genes (UBL3, SOX21, and LIG4). Although large-scale genomic studies have shown LUADs to be molecularly heterogeneous, the majority of LUAD cases share the common feature of RTK/RAS/RAF signaling activation through a genetic driver (Desai et al , 2014; Swanton and Govindan, 2016). A key confounder when we try to define RPA(–) LUADs as a distinct entity is the technical limitation of reliably detecting RTK/RAS/RAF pathway genomic lesions in impure tumor samples. Strikingly, 28/85 cases in the present study that were previously found to be negative for any RTK/RAS/RAF lesion by WES and RNA-seq pipelines were subsequently shown by our WGS analysis to harbor a somatic RTK/RAS/RAF driver. The recent discovery of small molecules with activity against KRAS p.G12C LUAD (Canon et al , 2019; Ostrem et al , 2013) highlights the importance of the precise identification of mutations at that locus. The recent discovery of small molecules with activity against KRAS p.G12C LUAD (Canon et al , 2019; Ostrem et al , 2013) highlights the importance of the precise identification of mutations at that locus. Eight of the 28 rescued RPA(+)G cases in our WGS cohort harbored cryptic SV lesions (protein-coding fusions, SCNAs), which represent alternative mutational mechanisms for (in)activating RTK/RAS/RAF genes (e.g., EGFR BFBC, focal deletions of NF1 and RASA1). Eight of the 28 rescued RPA(+)G cases in our WGS cohort harbored cryptic SV lesions (protein-coding fusions, SCNAs), which represent alternative mutational mechanisms for (in)activating RTK/RAS/RAF genes (e.g., EGFR BFBC, focal deletions of NF1 and RASA1). Eight of the 28 rescued RPA(+)G cases in our WGS cohort harbored cryptic SV lesions (protein-coding fusions, SCNAs), which represent alternative mutational mechanisms for (in)activating RTK/RAS/RAF genes (e.g., EGFR BFBC, focal deletions of NF1 and RASA1). Eight of the 28 rescued RPA(+)G cases in our WGS cohort harbored cryptic SV lesions (protein-coding fusions, SCNAs), which represent alternative mutational mechanisms for (in)activating RTK/RAS/RAF genes (e.g., EGFR BFBC, focal deletions of NF1 and RASA1). If the 57 RPA(–)G cases identified in this study represent a distinct biological entity of RTK/RAS/RAF-independent LUADs, then what pathway drives them to proliferate? Such a path may accumulate key genetic alterations in a different order than RPA(+) tumors (Lee et al , 2019), begin in an alternate cell of origin, or undergo lineage switching in the course of evolution. 