The chemical shifts for the two conformers were distinct from those of the apo-SID (Figure 1B & 1C), implying two different modes of HID-binding. The chemical shifts for the two conformers were distinct from those of the apo-SID (Figure 1B & 1C), implying two different modes of HID-binding. However, exchange peaks were readily detected between the two conformers in the NOESY spectra, which facilitated assignment of key resonances at the protein-protein interface for the second conformer including the methyl bearing side chains of Leu207, Leu211, Ile216, Leu220, and Thr222, the Hα/Hβ resonances of Asp219, the Hδ/Hε resonances of Tyr209, among others (Supplementary Table S1). Although the origin of these line broadening effects is unknown, such effects are not uncommon at protein-ligand interfaces and could, in part, be due to multiple modes of ligand binding.15,16 Because exchange-relayed NOEs were also observed in this spectrum (e.g. involving Leu620 Hδ1 and Tyr209 Hε in the second conformer and Met702 Hε and Tyr209 Hδ in the first conformer, both of which were due to direct NOEs involving the same SID protons in the second conformer; Figure 2B), we exercised extreme caution in interpreting NOEs. The widespread lack of chemical shift information at the backbone level coupled with the general lack of intramolecular NOEs involving the second conformer precluded computational modeling of this conformation using the relatively small number of intermolecular NOEs. Advances in NMR instrumentation and methodology over the past couple of decades have shaped our views regarding the amplitudes and timescales of motion in macromolecules and their impact on biological function.1-3 A recurring theme to emerge from these studies is the propensity of these molecules to sample high energy states, in addition to a dominant ground-state conformation. We specifically targeted those residues that have no significant role in the first conformer in engaging the HID but could play a role in stabilizing the interaction with the second conformer. Collectively, our results suggest that the same residues of SID in the first conformer that play vital roles for engaging HID are also important for interactions involving the second conformer. Although the 13Cε chemical shifts for the two conformers were similar (Figure 1B), the 1Hδ and 13Cδ chemical shifts were well-resolved to permit the intensities of the auto and exchange peaks to be monitored as a function of mixing time (Figure 3A). This puts the timescale of exchange in the realm of intermediate exchange, which could explain the absence of two sets of resonances for the HID at the protein-protein interface and for the HID and SID at the backbone level, especially if the difference in chemical shifts between the two states is small. It could also explain the line broadening effects witnessed for a subset of HID resonances at the interface. We surmise that the hydrophobic pockets located on a relatively flat surface of the target and the presence of an imperfectly-repeating sequence motif within the polypeptide (Figure 2A, bottom panel) allows for multiple modes of target engagement. We surmise that the hydrophobic pockets located on a relatively flat surface of the target and the presence of an imperfectly-repeating sequence motif within the polypeptide (Figure 2A, bottom panel) allows for multiple modes of target engagement. Finally, we note that conformational homogeneity by NMR is commonly evaluated based on the characteristics of 1H-15N correlated spectra; studies of the Sds3-Sin3A interaction described herein serve a cautionary tale in that heterogeneity could be manifest in more subtle ways. 