The 2012 standard defined a closed-loop system as having a constant collection medium volume.It may be difficult to detect the analyte in an open-loop system with gas collection medium if the permeant is not volatile (lower vapor pressure than 1 mm Hg at 25 °C or has a high boiling point beyond 150 °C at 1 atmosphere external pressure). The 2012 standard defined a closed-loop system as having a constant collection medium volume.It may be difficult to detect the analyte in an open-loop system with gas collection medium if the permeant is not volatile (lower vapor pressure than 1 mm Hg at 25 °C or has a high boiling point beyond 150 °C at 1 atmosphere external pressure). Nevertheless, the 2012 standard defined breakthrough times of different analytes irrespective of toxicity or volatility for both open-loop and closed-loop modes: breakthrough detection time (BT) and standardized breakthrough time (SBT), as well as SSPR, and cumulative permeation at a specified time (CP). Nevertheless, the 2012 standard defined breakthrough times of different analytes irrespective of toxicity or volatility for both open-loop and closed-loop modes: breakthrough detection time (BT) and standardized breakthrough time (SBT), as well as SSPR, and cumulative permeation at a specified time (CP). When the measured concentration becomes constant, this signals the attainment of the steady state. When the measured concentration becomes constant, this signals the attainment of the steady state. When the measured concentration becomes constant, this signals the attainment of the steady state. When the measured concentration becomes constant, this signals the attainment of the steady state. The SSPR is then calculated by multiplying this constant concentration in μg/liter by the collection medium flow rate in liter/min and then dividing the result by the glove piece area in cm2 contacted by the collection medium. The 2012 standard also defines the SSPR in an open-loop system as when measured permeation rate values for samples at 5-min intervals have less than 5% relative standard deviation, with the average of four consecutive measurements being the SSPR. For a recirculating closed-loop system with direct reading instrument in-line, the linear portion of the cumulated mass (concentration) or cumulated mass/exposed area versus time curve defines the steady state period. For a recirculating closed-loop system with direct reading instrument in-line, the linear portion of the cumulated mass (concentration) or cumulated mass/exposed area versus time curve defines the steady state period. In studies using volume replacement with solvent after sampling, accurate results may not occur when mixing or solubility are inadequate. The ASTM permeation cells were submerged at 25 °C and the tray agitated at different velocities along the horizontal axis depending on the challenge type. The ASTM permeation cells were submerged at 25 °C and the tray agitated at different velocities along the horizontal axis depending on the challenge type. The ASTM permeation cells were submerged at 25 °C and the tray agitated at different velocities along the horizontal axis depending on the challenge type. The ASTM permeation cells were submerged at 25 °C and the tray agitated at different velocities along the horizontal axis depending on the challenge type. The optimized air headspace volume caused turbulent mixing at the optimized tray agitation rate. The minimum number of chemotherapy agents to be tested is nine. Higher SSPRs were found for ISO cells. The SSPR data depended on collection gas flow rate. [34]Formaldehyde permeation from 37% formalin challenge was detected through natural rubber gloves, where the ASTM breakthrough times were 17–67 min, but the permeation rates were not high enough for breakthrough to have occurred according to the EN open-loop standards. [8] The Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) has skin notation nomenclature similar to ACGIH’s 1968 recommendations, the major difference for “skin” being that the chemical is known to be dermally absorbed. It is to be noted that ASTM F739 now sets 27 ± 1 °C as the standard permeation temperature (but still allows other temperatures) whereas previous versions of ASTM F739 let the user choose a permeation temperature but specified a temperature variation of no more than ±1 °C. It is to be noted that ASTM F739 now sets 27 ± 1 °C as the standard permeation temperature (but still allows other temperatures) whereas previous versions of ASTM F739 let the user choose a permeation temperature but specified a temperature variation of no more than ±1 °C. [9] The United States (U.S.) Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has strategies for estimating dermal exposure and the use of personal protective equipment (PPE). Since harmonization of EN and ISO is already occurring, harmonization will be faster if fewer countries have to change their statutes.Whole glove permeationThe permeation standards discussed above are convenient because users can choose the permeation temperature and only a piece of the glove is needed for testing. [37,38]The scientific literature of whole glove permeation is described next, all studies being at room temperature unless specified otherwise.Williams in 1981[39] measured breakthrough times at 3 μg/cm2/min and permeation rates of 1,4-dichloro-2-butene that was sprayed at a motionless whole glove (8 different glove types) on a stainless steel tubing artificial hand. [10] The American Industrial Hygiene Association from 2008–2011 did have a Biological Environmental Exposure Level Project Team for skin risk assessment. The stains appeared on an inner white cotton glove (sensitivity was at the microgram level) and were detected fastest at the points where the greatest hand pressure was exerted on the contaminated handle of a screwdriver used in the work activity.A 1990 study of chemotherapeutic drugs through a surgical latex disposable whole glove at 37 °C featured a modified Franz permeation cell with a pneumatic flexion feature that produced no significant difference in NBTs but doubled the calculated diffusion coefficient for cyclophosphamide relative to no flexion. Although there was poor precision, there were significant increases for flexed relative to static situations for SSPR, and also significant decreases in BTs for both cases. [37,38] Moreover, glove resistance and texture are affected not only by movement, flexion and extension, but also by other mechanical and physical motions such as pushing, pulling, lifting, and pressing objects as well as stretching hands while conducting individual or multiple tasks, all adding stress on the gloves that might result in hole formation and glove thinning at pressure points with enhanced permeation when co-exposed by solvent. [37,38] Moreover, glove resistance and texture are affected not only by movement, flexion and extension, but also by other mechanical and physical motions such as pushing, pulling, lifting, and pressing objects as well as stretching hands while conducting individual or multiple tasks, all adding stress on the gloves that might result in hole formation and glove thinning at pressure points with enhanced permeation when co-exposed by solvent. [37,38] Moreover, glove resistance and texture are affected not only by movement, flexion and extension, but also by other mechanical and physical motions such as pushing, pulling, lifting, and pressing objects as well as stretching hands while conducting individual or multiple tasks, all adding stress on the gloves that might result in hole formation and glove thinning at pressure points with enhanced permeation when co-exposed by solvent. This also showed the gentle forces in the ASTM moving tray water bath technique caused enhanced permeation relative to an immobile whole glove. This also showed the gentle forces in the ASTM moving tray water bath technique caused enhanced permeation relative to an immobile whole glove. This also showed the gentle forces in the ASTM moving tray water bath technique caused enhanced permeation relative to an immobile whole glove. This also showed the gentle forces in the ASTM moving tray water bath technique caused enhanced permeation relative to an immobile whole glove. One of the responsive gloves was Kimtech G5 Sterling which is not recommended for use with ethanol.Banaee and Que Hee[48] repeated the Matthews study but with limonene for four types of KCP disposable nitrile gloves. One of the responsive gloves was Kimtech G5 Sterling which is not recommended for use with ethanol.Banaee and Que Hee[48] repeated the Matthews study but with limonene for four types of KCP disposable nitrile gloves. KCP, using an open-loop gas collection method at room temperature, reported a NBT for limonene of 105 min for this glove. However, the cyclohexanol and limonene ASTM moving tray data at 35 °C were not statistically different at p ≤ 0.05 from the corresponding clenching/non-clenching dextrous robot hand data for the thicker disposable nitrile gloves, indicating adequacy of the ASTM moving tray method at 35 °C to predict permeation up to clenching forces of 1.8 kg. The Phalen data did show decreases in NBT and increases for SSPR for hand movement when disposable nitrile gloves were challenged with ethanol. A common directive in safety data sheets is to “Use the appropriate glove”, something that has to be determined by a professional who needs to understand the factors involved and to employ “professional judgment.” Part of the latter involves the application of past history to current practice. To obtain the relevant reference for this first portion, the general abstract set was refined with search words: ASTM F739, EN 374, ISO 6529, permeation cell, breakthrough time, steady state permeation, diffusion coefficient, theory, report, review, book, production, and manufacture. Thin gloves allow more facile manipulation of work pieces and greater wearer comfort than the thicker ones of the same material. For both types, the greater the thickness, the greater the chemical resistance, but manipulation of work pieces becomes more difficult, especially if they are small. For both types, the greater the thickness, the greater the chemical resistance, but manipulation of work pieces becomes more difficult, especially if they are small. For both types, the greater the thickness, the greater the chemical resistance, but manipulation of work pieces becomes more difficult, especially if they are small. For both types, the greater the thickness, the greater the chemical resistance, but manipulation of work pieces becomes more difficult, especially if they are small. [16]Permeation is the process by which a chemical moves through a material at the molecular level. [16]Permeation is the process by which a chemical moves through a material at the molecular level. [2,15–22] Permeation may occur without any observable effects on glove materials. The analytical technique to assess what and how much is permeating must be appropriately accurate and precise. In 2002, about 15 trillion pounds of chemicals were imported/produced in the U.S.,[4] and a peak of about 27 trillion pounds in 2005. Such parameters also influence the time when the challenge chemical reaches a specified J and/or can be detected on the inner surface as denoted by a breakthrough time (BT). Such parameters also influence the time when the challenge chemical reaches a specified J and/or can be detected on the inner surface as denoted by a breakthrough time (BT). The mathematical model for non-Fickian diffusion is much more complex with D no longer simply related to L2, but to variables related to materials being non-isotropic and the inner structure of each material. [16] The 2012 primary cell allows a material exposure/collection diameter of 2.54 cm (Figure 1) and the alternative cell material exposure diameter is 5.1 cm (Figure 2). 