For these experiments eosinophils were loaded with Fura-2 and allowed to form tethered attachments to BSA-treated glass coverslips. 5b), which correlated well in both time course and magnitude with the data reported in Fig. Tyrosine phosphorylation of Cbl enhances binding to SH2 or SH3 domain-containing proteins such as phosphatidylinositol 3 (PI-3) kinase and PLC-γ (Odai et al  1995). In eosinophils, β2-integrin ligation and tyrosine phosphorylation of Cbl have been associated with an increase in inositol phosphate (IP) production that was blocked by genistein, a broad-spectrum protein tyrosine kinase inhibitor (Kato et al  1998). For eosinophils, initial attachment to activated endothelial cells involves primary tethering that is predominantly mediated by P-selectin (Kitayama et al  1997). Adhesion was monitored in individual eosinophils by measuring changes in surface area contact with the substrate and in populations of eosinophils using a new method that measures increases in impedance associated with the formation of β2-integrin-dependent attachment to the substrate. The time course of changes in surface area contact with the substrate indicated that, once initiated, eosinophil spreading reached its maximum within 5 min. These results indicated that β2-integrin-dependent phosphorylation of Cbl was involved in activation of PLC-γ, leading to the production of IP3 and diacylglycerol. These results indicated that β2-integrin-dependent phosphorylation of Cbl was involved in activation of PLC-γ, leading to the production of IP3 and diacylglycerol. Inspection of eosinophil morphology and MBP staining at the end of the experiment indicated that the eosinophils had undergone degranulation, which is associated with loss of plasma membrane integrity. Inspection of eosinophil morphology and MBP staining at the end of the experiment indicated that the eosinophils had undergone degranulation, which is associated with loss of plasma membrane integrity. This finding was consistent with a previous study showing a role for this atypical PKC isoform in β2-integrin-regulated adhesion in granulocytes (Kato et al  2005a; Yamaguchi et al  2006). This finding was consistent with a previous study showing a role for this atypical PKC isoform in β2-integrin-regulated adhesion in granulocytes (Kato et al  2005a; Yamaguchi et al  2006). This finding was consistent with a previous study showing a role for this atypical PKC isoform in β2-integrin-regulated adhesion in granulocytes (Kato et al  2005a; Yamaguchi et al  2006). This finding was consistent with a previous study showing a role for this atypical PKC isoform in β2-integrin-regulated adhesion in granulocytes (Kato et al  2005a; Yamaguchi et al  2006). The results of this study and findings from previously published reports suggest that outside-in signaling responsible for adhesion strengthening/stabilization occurs after the Ca2+ mobilization step and involves activation of PI-3 kinase. The mechanism of PI-3 kinase activation has not been definitively established in eosinophils, but previous studies have demonstrated that the enzyme can be stimulated by increases in [Ca2+]i (Liu et al  2007) or by tyrosine phosphorylation (Kim et al  1995). PI-3 kinase activation results in increased synthesis of phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3) and phosphatidyl 3,4-bisphosphate. Activation of PKCζ depends on PIP3, and 3′-PI-dependent protein kinase 1, which binds with a high affinity to PIP3, phosphorylates PKCζ, and activates the enzyme. The reason why adhesion is not completely blocked by PI-3 kinase or PKCζ inhibition is not clear. Following formation of a tethered attachment to the substrate, we speculate that β2-integrin engagement initiates tyrosine kinase-mediated phosphorylation of Cbl and subsequent activation of PLCγ to produce IP3 and mobilization of Ca2+ from internal stores. Calcium release facilitates integrin recruitment/clustering on the plasma membrane and actin polymerization necessary for cell spreading. Ras activation leading to focal clustering and activation of CD11/CD18 has also been implicated in IL-5-, eotaxin-1-, and fMLP-induced adhesion and may also play a similar role in β2-integrin-initiated adhesion. Many types of signaling molecules activate eosinophils, including specific cytokines (IL-5, IL-3, and GM-CSF), secretory IgA (sIgA), IgG-coated objects, lipoxygenase products such as leuko-triene B4, and lipid mediators including platelet activating factor (Abu-Ghazaleh et al  1992; Bankers-Fulbright et al  2004; Rothenberg and Hogan 2006). Alpha calf serum was purchased from HyClone Laboratories (Logan, UT). PKCζ myristoylated pseudosubstrate was purchased from Calbiochem (San Diego, CA). Each stimulus has a distinct signaling pattern, and whether or not these stimuli use common pathways to activate eosinophils remains an active area of investigation. Heparinized blood was collected from atopic and nonatopic volunteers and an equal volume of PIPES buffered solution was added (25 mM PIPES, 50 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 25 mM NaOH, 5.4 mM glucose, pH 7.4). After centrifugation (560 g, 30 min at 4°C), the plasma and Percoll layers were removed by aspiration. After incubation, the cell mixture was diluted with PIPES buffered solution and 1% calf serum and eluted through a steel-wool column suspended in a strong magnet. In particular, IL-5 is thought to play a critical role in most eosinophil-associated diseases (Jenei et al  2006; Kato et al  2005b; Sano et al  2005; Someya et al  1997; Yamaguchi et al  2006). Intracellular [Ca2+] MeasurementsEosinophils were plated onto chamber slides that allowed for perfusion and ratio imaging. Eosinophils were washed with HBSS containing 10 mM glucose, 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.4. The chamber slide was perfused with HBSS (2 ml/min) at 25°C. [Ca2+]i was calculated according to the calibration equations provided by Grynkiewicz et al  (1985). [Ca2+]i was calculated according to the calibration equations provided by Grynkiewicz et al  (1985). [Ca2+]i was calculated according to the calibration equations provided by Grynkiewicz et al  (1985). Chambers were washed 3 × 15 min with 1 × PBS and the plastic chambers were removed from the glass slide. Chambers were washed 3 × 15 min with 1 × PBS and the plastic chambers were removed from the glass slide. Chambers were washed 3 × 15 min with 1 × PBS and the plastic chambers were removed from the glass slide. For multiple comparisons with a common control, data were analyzed using a one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s test. Activation of plasma membrane NADPH oxidase is responsible for the extracellular generation of superoxide anions (Bankers-Fulbright et al  2001; Someya et al  1997). In addition, the transition from tethered attachment to maximum surface spreading occurs within 3 min at a temperature of 25°C. Comparison of images from control and anti-CD18 antibody-treated eosinophils acquired at the end of the experiment (Fig. Eosinophil granules contain toxic proteins that are thought to play an important role in the pathogenesis of asthma and other allergic diseases involving eosinophilic inflammation (Denzler et al  2001; Walsh 2001). A similar degree of inhibition (~70%) was observed when PKCζ activity was inhibited by pretreating cells with a membrane-permeable pseudosubstrate inhibitor. A similar degree of inhibition (~70%) was observed when PKCζ activity was inhibited by pretreating cells with a membrane-permeable pseudosubstrate inhibitor. The results indicate that treatment with jasplakinolide dramatically alters actin distribution within the cell and inhibits cell spreading. The results indicate that treatment with jasplakinolide dramatically alters actin distribution within the cell and inhibits cell spreading. 