Despite the use of intraoperative MER and the fact that the electrode is radially constrained within the surrounding brain tissue after implantation, acute processes introduced in the operation, such as pneumocephalus, have not yet resolved. Despite the use of intraoperative MER and the fact that the electrode is radially constrained within the surrounding brain tissue after implantation, acute processes introduced in the operation, such as pneumocephalus, have not yet resolved. Despite the use of intraoperative MER and the fact that the electrode is radially constrained within the surrounding brain tissue after implantation, acute processes introduced in the operation, such as pneumocephalus, have not yet resolved. Despite the use of intraoperative MER and the fact that the electrode is radially constrained within the surrounding brain tissue after implantation, acute processes introduced in the operation, such as pneumocephalus, have not yet resolved. Scout images taken from CT documenting the implant trajectory and angular deviation matched the projections of the three-dimensional segmented object rotated to simulate anterior–posterior and lateral views by visual inspection (Fig. Vector Plot of Electrode DisplacementA corresponding vector plot for Method 2 calculations is also shown (Fig. Although our study was retrospective and inadequately powered to significantly correlate these metrics, our results support two previous publications.3,17 Three dimensional measurements, maximum electrode deformation (Method 1) and electrode tip retraction (Method 2) provided insight into the hypothesized postero-lateral postoperative brain shift leading to postoperative electrode deformation and electrode retraction, although establishing significance was not possible with this dataset. Three dimensional measurements, maximum electrode deformation (Method 1) and electrode tip retraction (Method 2) provided insight into the hypothesized postero-lateral postoperative brain shift leading to postoperative electrode deformation and electrode retraction, although establishing significance was not possible with this dataset. In comparing calculated upward displacement (Method 1) to measured rostral displacement (Method 2), no statistical significance was found between the calculated and measured value for upward tip displacement, with a value of p < 0.2. Instead of needing to repeat the time-consuming process of both obtaining and viewing CT and MRI scans, as well as fusing them, neurologists may consider deformation calculations to guide adaptation of intraoperative test stimulation data in order to compensate post-operatively. Ultimately, delayed imaging of the electrode shows deformation due to the resolution of pneumocephalus and the return of the brain to its preoperative condition. This was statistically significant, with p < 0.05. This was statistically significant (p < 0.01). This was statistically significant (p < 0.01). This was statistically significant (p < 0.01). Using a non-rigid device, such as the electrode utilized in DBS procedures,14 would allow for better adaptation and movement with respect to the shifting of the brain and structures. Using a non-rigid device, such as the electrode utilized in DBS procedures,14 would allow for better adaptation and movement with respect to the shifting of the brain and structures. Method 1 (calculated method) utilizes a three-dimensional reconstruction obtained from a single delayed CT scan. Method 2 (measured method) is performed via fusion of immediate and delayed post-operative images. Understanding the relationship of head position and implications of the proposed implementation of lengthy procedures utilizing rigid infusion devices in the setting of convection-enhanced delivery is crucial. Once pneumocephalus has resolved and the brain has shifted back to its preoperative position, the implanted electrode is found to be complexly deformed into a partial “question mark” shape, resulting in retraction of the electrode tip from its original target location (Fig. Once pneumocephalus has resolved and the brain has shifted back to its preoperative position, the implanted electrode is found to be complexly deformed into a partial “question mark” shape, resulting in retraction of the electrode tip from its original target location (Fig. Once pneumocephalus has resolved and the brain has shifted back to its preoperative position, the implanted electrode is found to be complexly deformed into a partial “question mark” shape, resulting in retraction of the electrode tip from its original target location (Fig. Once pneumocephalus has resolved and the brain has shifted back to its preoperative position, the implanted electrode is found to be complexly deformed into a partial “question mark” shape, resulting in retraction of the electrode tip from its original target location (Fig. Once pneumocephalus has resolved and the brain has shifted back to its preoperative position, the implanted electrode is found to be complexly deformed into a partial “question mark” shape, resulting in retraction of the electrode tip from its original target location (Fig. As brain shift has been a clear factor introducing targeting error, microelectrode recording7 and computational models have been utilized to correct for and minimize potential electrode misplacement. Patient SelectionA retrospective chart review was performed of all patients who underwent DBS surgery for treatment of movement disorders including: PD, tremor or dystonia at the University of Wisconsin between 8/07/2007 and 8/10/2010. Description of Stereotactic Surgical Targeting and ImplantationFollowing current protocol at our institution, patients are taken to the operating suite on the morning of surgery for sedation, stereotactic frame placement, imaging for surgical targeting, and surgical implantation. After the administration of propofol/dexmetatomadine sedation and administration of lid-ocane/bupivicane local anesthetic, the Cosman-Roberts-Wells (CRW) stereotactic frame (Integra Neuroscience, Plainsboro, NJ) and associated Luminant® stereotactic MRI/CT localizer is applied. Preoperatively obtained stereotactic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) images are computationally rendered stereotactic through fusion to the stereotactic CT scan using a commercially available neuronavigation system (StealthStation®, Framelink®, Medtonic Inc.). Preoperatively obtained stereotactic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) images are computationally rendered stereotactic through fusion to the stereotactic CT scan using a commercially available neuronavigation system (StealthStation®, Framelink®, Medtonic Inc.). Preoperatively obtained stereotactic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) images are computationally rendered stereotactic through fusion to the stereotactic CT scan using a commercially available neuronavigation system (StealthStation®, Framelink®, Medtonic Inc.). Preoperatively obtained stereotactic magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) images are computationally rendered stereotactic through fusion to the stereotactic CT scan using a commercially available neuronavigation system (StealthStation®, Framelink®, Medtonic Inc.). Computational Techniques for Post Implant DBS Electrode Deformation AnalysisIn order to determine deformation and shift of the DBS electrode and measure pneumocephalus, both early post-implant brain scans and time-delayed post-implant brain scans were utilized. The post-operative CT/MRI images (with brain shift) from the initial DBS implantation and the pre-operative CT/MRI images from the second of the staged DBS implantations (showing the initial lead in the brain after brain shift resolution) were loaded in a neuronavigation system (iPlan Stereotaxy® 2.6, BrainLab, Heimstetten, Germany) and fused (scan #2 [time delayed] = reference scan, scan #1 = comparison scan) based upon identifiable anatomical landmarks as is done routinely during surgical planning. Pneumocephalus volume and distance were also computationally determined using iPlan Stereotaxy 2.6 (BrainLab). Vector measurements were taken along the entire length of the projected straight trajectory and the point at which the electrode deviated the farthest from the trajectory was denoted as the “width at greatest deviation” and can be seen on Fig. Distance A is the distance from the point of greatest deviation to the implant depth. Distance C is the distance from the entry point into the skull to the point of greatest deviation.Using simple geometry, the approximate degree of tip retraction could be modeled and estimated. We hypothesize that the implant depth after electrode deformation is going to be shallower than the initial implant depth when the electrode is straight. We hypothesize that the implant depth after electrode deformation is going to be shallower than the initial implant depth when the electrode is straight. Depending on the surgical center, targeting is performed either with historical imaging sets obtained preoperatively or with imaging obtained intraoperatively.5 If imaging and targeting are not performed intraoperatively, there exists the possibility of a change in the location of intended implantation in the brain with respect to the historic imaging sets. Next, the distance between the point of greatest deviation and point 1 was measured on the straight dashed trajectory. Characteristics of Patient PopulationAll patients who underwent a staged bilateral DBS surgery for treatment of movement disorders, including PD, tremor or dystonia, were included, and a total of 52 patients were identified. 