The human hippocampus is among the most well-studied structures in the brain because of its important functional role in memory processing and learning, its remarkable neuronal cell plasticity, and its involvement in epilepsy and neurodegenerative disease processes. The safety of many implants is not known, and special care should be taken when imaging female subjects who may be pregnant because fields greater than 4T are not classified as insignificant risks for children younger than 1-month-old by the FDA. The safety of many implants is not known, and special care should be taken when imaging female subjects who may be pregnant because fields greater than 4T are not classified as insignificant risks for children younger than 1-month-old by the FDA. Finally, the dimensions of the 7T scanner itself with its longer bore and tightly fitting head coil may reduce the number of subjects willing and able to be scanned.In conclusion, this 7T protocol serves to bridge the gap in understanding between the in vivo and in vitro imaging appearance of internal hippocampal architecture. Unique features of in vivo hippocampal imaging at 7T provide a better understanding of the appearance of clinically imaged anatomy at lower field strengths. We present a protocol that takes advantage of high SNR and novel contrast attributes of high-field imaging with reasonable imaging time and without sacrificing FOV. We present a protocol that takes advantage of high SNR and novel contrast attributes of high-field imaging with reasonable imaging time and without sacrificing FOV. We present a protocol that takes advantage of high SNR and novel contrast attributes of high-field imaging with reasonable imaging time and without sacrificing FOV. We present a protocol that takes advantage of high SNR and novel contrast attributes of high-field imaging with reasonable imaging time and without sacrificing FOV. The allocortex of the hippocampal formation is comprised of differing cytoarchitecture which forms the six sublayers of the hippocampus and the three sublayers of the dentate (Fig. Recently, small field of view (FOV) in vitro studies have defined the imaging appearance of the hippocampal cytoarchitecture using high-field MR at 3T (9), 7T (10), 8T (11), and at 9.4T (12). These studies bridge the understanding of hippocampal sublayer histology and the in vivo appearance at ultrahigh-field strength MRI and serve as the basis for understanding imaging characteristics of this complex region at lower field strengths.Until now, ultrahigh-field in vivo hippocampal imaging has not been described. RF power was also limited by the scanner's power monitoring unit to 10W averaged over 30 seconds corresponding to ≈1.6 W/kg head specific absorption rate (SAR) (roughly one-half the Food and Drug Administration [FDA] limit). MR imaging sequences used in this study (Table 1) were adapted from a protocol recently developed by contributing authors (13) and included inversion prepared T1-weighted 3D turbo field echo (T1W 3D TFE), T2*-weighted 2D fast field echo (T2*W 2D FFE), and susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI). The T2*W 2D FFE sequence provided good contrast between gray and white matter while also highlighting features with differences in T2*. The T2*W 2D FFE sequence provided good contrast between gray and white matter while also highlighting features with differences in T2*. In the case of images used for venous anatomy identification, no enhancement of the SWI magnitude images was performed using the phase data, as is often performed with SWI (15). One example showing filtered phase images and enhanced SWI magnitude images is presented for comparison. These veins are shown to be in direct continuity with the C-shaped band of low signal on both the T2*W 2D FFE and SWI sequences, so they also may contribute to imaging characteristics of this region at lower field strength.Data from the thin slice SWI can be reconstructed using minIPs to visualize various venous interconnections. For the purposes of venous anatomy identification in this work, the minIPs of nonenhanced SWI magnitude images were sufficient.Previous in vitro and in vivo 8T MRI studies have revealed cerebral microvasculature in the range of 100 micron-sized veins (20,21). Hippocampal sublayer thickness ranges from 0.1–0.5 mm (16), which approaches the resolution limit of practical in vivo full FOV MR imaging at lower field strengths. Using very high field MRI (7T) protocol optimization coupled with an understanding of the in vitro hippocampal anatomy improved anatomic clarity of the hippocampal formation's subcomponents and can be exploited to better understand the imaging appearance at routine clinical field strength. Therefore, RF power deposition can vary significantly across the brain, leading to miscalibration of the desired flip angle. Finally, SAR levels increase significantly at higher fields. 