Although there is evidence that those with BNhxAN have MMPI profiles almost completely in the pathological range, in particular, exhibiting more obsessive-compulsiveness and impulsivity than those with BN and no history of AN,20 these groups generally have not differed in personality disorder diagnoses.5,21 From a less pathological perspective, no differences were found in impulsivity using the impulse regulation subscale of the Eating Disorder Inventory22 (EDI).5 Similarly, research with the perfectionism subscale of the EDI22,23 has yielded no group differences.5,17,18 Thus, most of the evidence suggests no significant differences between these groups in terms of perfectionism and impulsivity. However, this literature has focused on unidimensional conceptualizations of these personality traits, whereas more recent empirical and conceptual work on these constructs suggests the importance of multiple underlying dimensions.24 One study assessed childhood sexual abuse and adverse family environment and found no significant differences in sexual abuse, but some evidence for lower rates of “indifference” (a possible proxy for neglect) and “violence” (a possible proxy for physical abuse) among BNhxAN.25 Another study found no group differences across a variety of unwanted sexual experiences.26 No published literature reports explicitly on whether those with and without a history of AN differ on other types of childhood adversity including emotional and physical neglect and abuse. Focusing on body composition, researchers found that BNhxAN patients retained some physiological anorectic traits, with lower BMI, lower muscle mass, lower body fat, and a higher percentage of extracellular water.27 With the strength of longitudinal data, other researchers found that individuals with BNhxAN were less likely to attain full recovery and more likely to exhibit diagnostic cross-over back to AN than those with BN but no history of AN.14 Inclusion criteria, as stated in the advertisements, were women ages 18 or older “with symptoms of BN (i.e., binge eating and purging).” Of the 144 who met DSM-IV criteria for current BN, six had a current BMI lower than 17.5 kg/m2 (considered a cut-off for AN28) and were excluded, resulting in 138 participants for the current analyses.b Women ranged in age from 18 to 55 with a mean age of 25.9 years (SD = 8.9 years) and were mostly single, never-married (75%) and Caucasian (87%), with at least some college education (94%). Inclusion criteria, as stated in the advertisements, were women ages 18 or older “with symptoms of BN (i.e., binge eating and purging).” Of the 144 who met DSM-IV criteria for current BN, six had a current BMI lower than 17.5 kg/m2 (considered a cut-off for AN28) and were excluded, resulting in 138 participants for the current analyses.b Women ranged in age from 18 to 55 with a mean age of 25.9 years (SD = 8.9 years) and were mostly single, never-married (75%) and Caucasian (87%), with at least some college education (94%). The criteria for binge eating established in the Eating Disorder Examination31 (EDE) were used to discern objectively large portions of food from smaller portions of food. Interested, eligible participants were then scheduled to attend an in-person assessment where they gave written informed consent and completed a set of questionnaires privately. This measure has adequate psychometrics37 and conceptualizes impulsivity as multidimensional via three subscales: attention (coefficient α 0.65 in this study), motor (α = 0.73), and nonplanning (α = 0.75).MaltreatmentMaltreatment was assessed with the Childhood Trauma Questionnaire38 (CTQ), which contains 28 items, rated on a five-point scale from “never true” to “very often true,” about various forms of childhood neglect and abuse reflected in the subscales of Emotional Neglect, Physical Neglect, Emotional Abuse, Physical Abuse, and Sexual Abuse. First, a significant minority of individuals with BN have at one point had AN, with rates of 25–41%.4,5 Second, while some possible areas of differences have been examined in depth (e.g., comorbid psychopathology),5,6–8 other areas have not (e.g., a history of maltreatment and personality), resulting in some limitations to our knowledge. Multivariate effects at the level of trends (p <.10) were followed up with univariate analyses to see what component was driving the effect. PersonalityThere were no significant differences between groups for the perfectionism dimensions of malad-aptive and adaptive perfectionism (F(2,135) = 1.89, Wilks’ Lambda = 0.97, p = .155, partial χ2 = 0.03) or for the impulsivity dimensions (F(3,134) = 0.64, Wilks’ Lambda = 0.99, p = .592, and partial χ2 = 0.01). Although this difference was driven primarily by physical abuse (medium-large effect size), the other forms of maltreatment also showed significant group differences (medium effect sizes). Although this difference was driven primarily by physical abuse (medium-large effect size), the other forms of maltreatment also showed significant group differences (medium effect sizes). Although this difference was driven primarily by physical abuse (medium-large effect size), the other forms of maltreatment also showed significant group differences (medium effect sizes). The personality findings suggest that, from both a unidimensional5,17 and a multidimensional perspective (the current work being the first report on multidimensionality), perfectionism and impulsivity do not differ between BN groups subtyped by history of AN. At this point, this is purely speculative, but longitudinal work assessing perfectionism along with eating disorder symptoms and diagnostic status could empirically test this. Recent work on childhood trauma and eating pathology suggests that maltreatment may be associated with certain aspects of bulimic pathology.43 These authors found that vomiting and laxative abuse were associated with sexual abuse and that emotional abuse was associated with eating pathology severity among women with BN; however, they did not report data related to a history of AN. First, the measures used are some of the most well-established and commonly used assessments reflecting the current understanding of eating pathology, personality, and childhood maltreatment. Also, rather than focus on one type of maltreatment, we used a measure that provided a range of various forms of abuse and neglect, which has long been advocated by trauma researchers.47 Second, the entire sample met criteria for a diagnosis of BN as established by a valid semistructured interview. First, this study relied on self-report, including self-reported height and weight, and, in some cases, retrospective recall. Although the CTQ is a well-established, psychometrically sound measure, it does not include the age(s) at which the maltreatment occurred, which may be relevant to better understanding connections with eating pathology. For example, the finding that pure generalized anxiety disorder, but not pure major depressive disorder, was associated with more maltreatment53 suggests that anxiety disorders and BNhxAN may be connected via associations with maltreatment. 