Circadian Rhythms and Metabolism However, TRF improved alignment between feeding phase and oxygen consumption [38].In murine models, TRF also leads to improvement of fatty acid turnover in the liver, brown and white adipose tissue, and cardiac muscle [61,64,65]. However, TRF improved alignment between feeding phase and oxygen consumption [38].In murine models, TRF also leads to improvement of fatty acid turnover in the liver, brown and white adipose tissue, and cardiac muscle [61,64,65]. However, TRF improved alignment between feeding phase and oxygen consumption [38].In murine models, TRF also leads to improvement of fatty acid turnover in the liver, brown and white adipose tissue, and cardiac muscle [61,64,65]. These patterns on a systemic level appear to be temporally coordinated by neuronal and chemical networks which are in turn maintained by various timekeeping mechanisms in the central nervous system (Figure 1) [7]. For example, in a cohort of patients undergoing a behavioral weight-loss treatment, those who consumed their calories earlier in the day were more likely to lose weight, compared to those who ate later [68]. For example, in a cohort of patients undergoing a behavioral weight-loss treatment, those who consumed their calories earlier in the day were more likely to lose weight, compared to those who ate later [68]. Another study, where two groups of obese women were randomized to consuming an isocaloric meal during breakfast or dinner, showed that high-calorie breakfast consumers had much better fasting glucose, insulin sensitivity, and improved lipid profile compared to the high-calorie dinner consumers [69]. The timing of food intake has as much of an impact, if not more, on energy homeostasis as the nutritional content of the diet and gut signaling. EECs contain multiple nutrient-dependent receptors, many of which are GPCRs, that can trigger depolarization and fluctuation in intracellular calcium and, hence, the secretion of gut peptides such as incretins, peptide YY, cholecystokinin, gastrin, serotonin, neurotensin, or secretin. Many of these peptides can then activate afferent enteric neurons, as well as work in an endocrine fashion. Bmal1 knockout mice have significantly decreased SIRT3 activity, which affects mitochondrial oxidative function [79]. Polyamines also regulate the activity of core clock proteins by modulating the interaction of PER2 and CRY1 [81]. These new studies not only suggest that circadian gene expression and, with it, host metabolism can be affected with ingestible supplements, but that other, undiscovered compounds in the diet can potentially have a tremendous influence in the rhythmicity of the circadian clock program. Ambient light is detected by specialized retinal ganglion cells that project to SCN neurons via the retinohypothalamic tract, as well as through multi-synaptic, indirect pathways via the thalamus [12]. In mice, GLP-1 excretion is circadian, with larger amounts being released in the evening, and is highly entrained by feeding behavior [82]. In mice, GLP-1 excretion is circadian, with larger amounts being released in the evening, and is highly entrained by feeding behavior [82]. Furthermore, in mice, FXR activation in hepatocytes, or FXR-mediated release of fibroblast growth factor 15 (FGF15) from the terminal ileum, play a modulatory role in lipid and glucose homeostasis [87]. TGR5 (G protein-coupled bile acid receptor 1, GPBAR1), another BA receptor, also plays an important regulatory role in host metabolism [88]. Importantly, both serum BA levels and the FXR pathway, including its gene targets, exhibit circadian behavior and are induced by feeding [91]. Recent studies show that the gut microbiome is far more dynamic than previously imagined. However, in DIO mice this cyclical fluctuation is dampened dramatically [63,93]. However, in DIO mice this cyclical fluctuation is dampened dramatically [63,93]. TRF restores oscillating fluctuations in key bacterial families that are thought to affect host metabolism [63]. TRF restores oscillating fluctuations in key bacterial families that are thought to affect host metabolism [63]. TRF restores oscillating fluctuations in key bacterial families that are thought to affect host metabolism [63]. Instead, it is entirely possible that a cascade of events is necessary for feeding entrainment. In addition, the dynamic fluctuations in the gut micro-biome can lead to cyclical fluctuation of primary and secondary BAs which can modulate FXR and TGR5 activation and downstream signaling, affecting energy expenditure and influencing cholesterol, lipid, and glucose homeostasis. Sleep/wake homeostasis has been far more difficult to study. Sleep/wake homeostasis has been far more difficult to study. These networks affect cellular processes through circadian proteins, which are exquisitely coordinated with key cellular metabolic regulators. These networks affect cellular processes through circadian proteins, which are exquisitely coordinated with key cellular metabolic regulators. These networks affect cellular processes through circadian proteins, which are exquisitely coordinated with key cellular metabolic regulators. These networks affect cellular processes through circadian proteins, which are exquisitely coordinated with key cellular metabolic regulators. These networks affect cellular processes through circadian proteins, which are exquisitely coordinated with key cellular metabolic regulators. The synchrony of these oscillating networks with endocrine and enteroendocrine hormones, and neuronal input at the system level, and with the cellular machinery at the single-cell level, likely synchronizes distant organs and discordant cellular processes. However, sleep is essential for maintaining metabolic health [13–15], likely by facilitating the removal of waste byproducts and restoration of necessary metabolites [16]. However, sleep is essential for maintaining metabolic health [13–15], likely by facilitating the removal of waste byproducts and restoration of necessary metabolites [16]. However, sleep is essential for maintaining metabolic health [13–15], likely by facilitating the removal of waste byproducts and restoration of necessary metabolites [16]. Although the sleep/wake cycle and the signals from SCN are highly linked, sleep is heavily influenced by a sleep homeostat akin to an hourglass oscillation. Although the sleep/wake cycle and the signals from SCN are highly linked, sleep is heavily influenced by a sleep homeostat akin to an hourglass oscillation. Although the sleep/wake cycle and the signals from SCN are highly linked, sleep is heavily influenced by a sleep homeostat akin to an hourglass oscillation. Although the sleep/wake cycle and the signals from SCN are highly linked, sleep is heavily influenced by a sleep homeostat akin to an hourglass oscillation. For example, a neural sleep factor (‘S’) rises during waking, and decays during sleep, hence regulating the timing, amount, and intensity of sleep [17]. Hence, many hormones that are released by the pituitary are circadian, with their levels oscillating throughout the day. Circadian Regulators and Metabolism These proteins, expressed in nearly every eukaryotic cell as well as in some prokaryotic organisms, allow each individual cell to have an autonomous, self-sustained mechanism to keep track of a 24 h day [6]. Transcriptomic studies show that up to 45% of all transcripts in mice display 24 h oscillations [24]. Feeding has a wide-ranging impact on rhythmic hepatic gene expression [28]. Moreover, post-prandial thermogenesis can also activate heat-shock factors, which subsequently modulate transcription of clock components. However, in the absence of any food intake only ~350 hepatic transcripts are rhythmic in a 24 h period [28]. Some of these genetic mouse models display aberrant feeding patterns, suggesting that a suboptimal feeding time may be contributing to metabolic disease. Some of these genetic mouse models display aberrant feeding patterns, suggesting that a suboptimal feeding time may be contributing to metabolic disease. Some of these genetic mouse models display aberrant feeding patterns, suggesting that a suboptimal feeding time may be contributing to metabolic disease. For example, Per1S714G mutant mice, where a serine to glycine mutation in PER1 causes acceleration of the molecular feedback loop, had a food intake time that differed with energy expenditure time by several hours [38].Disruption of feeding/fasting rhythms, circadian gene expression, or, in most cases, both, is commonly found in animal model of obesity and dysmetabolism. Hence, animal models of obesity and dysmetabolism often have dyssynchrony between circadian clock genes and feeding/fasting driven metabolic regulators. Restricting feeding of mice, which are nocturnal animals, to daytime leads to weight gain [46]. Restricting feeding of mice, which are nocturnal animals, to daytime leads to weight gain [46]. Restricting feeding of mice, which are nocturnal animals, to daytime leads to weight gain [46]. Restricting feeding of mice, which are nocturnal animals, to daytime leads to weight gain [46]. Restricting feeding of mice, which are nocturnal animals, to daytime leads to weight gain [46]. Shift workers, or laborers that work outside typical daytime hours, comprise about 15–20% of the workforce population in the USA [50]. Shift workers, or laborers that work outside typical daytime hours, comprise about 15–20% of the workforce population in the USA [50]. Other factors that affect the normal cyclical oscillation along this axis (e.g., chronic stress or treatment with high doses of corticosteroids) also lead to metabolic syndrome [57], although it is unclear whether this can specifically be related to circadian dyssynchrony.Laboratory studies on humans have also shown that dyssynchrony between feeding/fasting time and the circadian clock can lead to obesity and dysmetabolism. At a cultural level, with the advent of electricity, modern humans are exposed to far more prolonged illumination [19]. Together these two phenomena are further environmental contributors to the rise in the prevalence of obesity over the past several decades. Together these two phenomena are further environmental contributors to the rise in the prevalence of obesity over the past several decades. 