Esophageal SCC is the 4th most common cause of cancer death in China (7). Strawberries slow progression of precancerous growthOf our 75 enrolled participants, 72 were evaluable for histology at the end of study—36 in each arm (Fig. Strawberries inhibit protein expression of iNOS, COX-2, pNFκB-p65, and pS6Western blot analysis was used to determine whether strawberries inhibited iNOS, COX-2, pNFκB-p65, and pS6 protein in esophageal mucosa after 6 months of berry treatment. 4, 6 months of a total of 60 g/d of strawberry treatment significantly inhibited protein expression of iNOS (79.50% reduction, P < 0.001), COX-2 (62.9% reduction, P < 0.001), pNFκB-p65 (62.6% reduction, P < 0.001), and pS6 (73.2% reduction, P < 0.001) in human esophageal mucosa. 5, Ki-67 labeling index was significantly reduced by treatment with 60 g/d of strawberries from 21.1 ± 9.6% at baseline to 13.2 ± 5.9% at the end of the study (37.9% reduction, P < 0.05). 5, Ki-67 labeling index was significantly reduced by treatment with 60 g/d of strawberries from 21.1 ± 9.6% at baseline to 13.2 ± 5.9% at the end of the study (37.9% reduction, P < 0.05). 5, Ki-67 labeling index was significantly reduced by treatment with 60 g/d of strawberries from 21.1 ± 9.6% at baseline to 13.2 ± 5.9% at the end of the study (37.9% reduction, P < 0.05). 5, Ki-67 labeling index was significantly reduced by treatment with 60 g/d of strawberries from 21.1 ± 9.6% at baseline to 13.2 ± 5.9% at the end of the study (37.9% reduction, P < 0.05). Endoscopy with mucosal iodine staining combined with histopathology has proved useful in identifying high-risk populations and offers multiple opportunities for assessment and intervention. Endoscopy with mucosal iodine staining combined with histopathology has proved useful in identifying high-risk populations and offers multiple opportunities for assessment and intervention. Selenomethionine had a protective effect in the subgroup with mild dysplasia, but the correlation was not significant (P = 0.08). Strawberries are an abundant source of flavonoid compounds (e.g., ellagic acid, ferulic acid, coumaric acid, quercetin, and the anthocyanins), vitamins (e.g., vitamins A, C, and E and folic acid), and minerals (e.g., calcium, selenium, and zinc; ref. Severe dysplasia is usually treated either by endoscopic mucosal resection or argon plasma coagulation, whereas mild or moderate dysplasia generally is not treated but monitored by routine endoscopy. Many of the known compounds have antioxidant and antiinflammatory activities and protect against cancer including ellagic acid (30), anthocyanins (31, 32), ascorbic acid (vitamin C; ref. Our data suggest that strawberries reduced the expression levels of iNOS and COX-2, 2 enzymes previously shown in our laboratory to be upregulated in rat esophageal tumorigenesis (36, 37). Strawberries may inhibit COX-2 and iNOS through the suppression of upstream mediators such as NFκB. Strawberries may inhibit COX-2 and iNOS through the suppression of upstream mediators such as NFκB. Strawberries may inhibit COX-2 and iNOS through the suppression of upstream mediators such as NFκB. Strawberries may inhibit COX-2 and iNOS through the suppression of upstream mediators such as NFκB. Measurement of pS6 by Western blot has been used to assess the activity of mTOR (42). Therefore, mild and moderate dysplasia are excellent surrogate endpoint biomarkers for the assessment of candidate chemoprevention agents. Because our results show that strawberries have inhibitory properties during the promotion/progression stages of esophageal carcinogenesis in humans, strawberries may be an alternative or work together with other chemopreventive drugs for the prevention of esophageal cancer. Until now, neither strawberries nor BRBs had been evaluated for chemopreventive effects against precursor lesions for esophageal SCC in humans. We now report a randomized phase II trial we conducted to investigate the effects of freeze-dried strawberries in a cohort of adult individuals with esophageal dysplastic lesions in the Henan and Shandong provinces of China where the population is at the highest risk for esophageal cancer in the world. COX-2 antibody was purchased from Cayman Chemical Company. The antibodies for nuclear factor kappa B-p65 (NFκB-p65), phospho-NFκB-p65 (pNFκB-p65), S6, and phospho-S6 (pS6) were obtained from Cell Signaling Technology. Both males and females were included in the trial.To be eligible for the trial, individuals were required to meet all the following inclusion criteria: (i) must be over the age of 40 and give informed consent; (ii) must be diagnosed with mild or moderate esophageal dysplasia; (iii) must be able to consume strawberry slurry in the span of 5 minutes; and (iv) have no prior history of intolerance or allergy to strawberry or strawberry-containing products.Individuals were excluded from the trial if they met one of the following criteria: (i) with a current malignancy identified histologically (with a history of malignancy or with evidence of recurrent or persistent disease); (ii) with severe dysplasia; (iii) unable to give informed consent; (iv) undergoing chemotherapy or radiation therapy; (v) taking non-steroidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAID) including aspirin and cannot abstain from it due to a medical condition; and (v) pregnant or lactating.Following completion of a detailed questionnaire on smoking/drinking habits and medical history, individuals interested in the study and who had the qualifications outlined above were asked to participate and sign an informed consent form. One biopsy sample was fixed in 10% neutral-buffered formalin for overnight, transferred to PBS, embedded in paraffin, and sectioned in 4-μm thickness for histologic evaluation. The other biopsy samples were stored in liquid nitrogen and then transferred to a −80°C freezer for subsequent cellular/molecular analyses. The other biopsy samples were stored in liquid nitrogen and then transferred to a −80°C freezer for subsequent cellular/molecular analyses. Evaluation of histologic gradeThe biopsy slides were stained with hematoxylin and eosin. The slides were independently reviewed by 3 gastrointestinal pathologists in a blinded fashion who were unaware of the participant’s history, the intervention group assignments, the time the specimens were collected and visual endoscopic findings. Protein concentration was measured using a DC Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. The blot was probed with iNOS (1:200, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), COX-2 (1:500, Cayman Chemical Co.), NFκB-p65 (1:1,000, Rabbit monoclonal, Cell Signaling Technology), pNFκB-p65 (1:1,000; Rabbit monoclonal, Cell Signaling Technology), S6 ribosomal protein (1:1,000; Rabbit monoclonal, Cell Signaling Technology), or pS6 ribosomal protein (1:1,000; Rabbit monoclonal, Cell Signaling Technology). During the end of incubation, the membrane was washed extensively with TTBS. The immunoreactive bands detected by Immun-star WesterC Kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories) were developed by Molecular Imager ChemiDoc XRS (Bio-Rad Laboratories) and bands quantity analyzed by Image Lab Software (version 2.0, Bio-Rad Laboratories). All statistical analysis was carried out using GraphPad Prism 5.0. There were 37 males and 38 females, and the average age of all participants was 57 years (range, 41–72 years). 2, the normal esophageal epithelium is a nonkeratinizing, stratified, squamous epithelium. 2, the normal esophageal epithelium is a nonkeratinizing, stratified, squamous epithelium. The architectural abnormalities include epithelial disorganization, loss of cell polarity, and overlapping nuclei. The architectural abnormalities include epithelial disorganization, loss of cell polarity, and overlapping nuclei. The architectural abnormalities include epithelial disorganization, loss of cell polarity, and overlapping nuclei. The cytologic abnormalities include nuclear enlargement, hyperchromasia, and pleomorphism, increased nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio, and increased mitotic activity. The cytologic abnormalities include nuclear enlargement, hyperchromasia, and pleomorphism, increased nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio, and increased mitotic activity. The cytologic abnormalities include nuclear enlargement, hyperchromasia, and pleomorphism, increased nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio, and increased mitotic activity. Esophageal dysplasia was categorized into 3 grades: mild dysplasia (less than 25% of the thickness of epithelium), moderate dysplasia (less than 50% of the thickness of epithelium), and severe dysplasia (more than 50% of the thickness of epithelium). 