The odds ratios for watching cultural/ political TV programs and going to the movies and exhibitions were even larger at, respectively 2.39 and 3.05. These unadjusted odds ratios were among the highest reported among all the independent variables included in the regression model. Unlike other studies (Sheppard et al  2004), household humidity and poor lighting was not significantly associated to child health. Unlike other studies (Sheppard et al  2004), household humidity and poor lighting was not significantly associated to child health. Previous research has indicated a strong association between maternal education and child health (Heaton et al  2005). We conceive of cultural capital not in terms of national norms, values, language and traditions but as the production or consumption of aesthetics – visual and performing art, music, and literature. Watching entertainment programs on television, and going to movies and art exhibitions may allow women in conservative patriarchal societies to be exposed to more autonomous female models and various situations and dilemmas despite their relative confinement to the home. Watching entertainment programs on television, and going to movies and art exhibitions may allow women in conservative patriarchal societies to be exposed to more autonomous female models and various situations and dilemmas despite their relative confinement to the home. Pierre Bourdieu referred to cultural capital as consisting of distinguishing tastes and practices acquired or accumulated differently by people over the course of their life much as economic capital (Bourdieu 1984; Bourdieu 1985). Low-income women often held the perception that physicians did not always listen to them (Kilpelainen et al  2001) and maternal cultural capital might have improved communication. Low-income women often held the perception that physicians did not always listen to them (Kilpelainen et al  2001) and maternal cultural capital might have improved communication. Since communication between physician and patient was especially important in increasing compliance (Winnick et al  2005), child health might have been enhanced both because physicians better understood the complaints presented by mothers and because mothers might have followed instructions more closely. Iranian students identified television as their most important source of information on HIV/AIDS (Tavoosi et al  2004) and similarly in Iraq the two most important sources among workers on tuberculosis, where physicians and television (Hashim et al  2003) . Our questionnaire can not confirm this mechanism since self-reported maternal life-satisfaction is an inadequate proxy for maternal depression, but future research may be valuable. social or economic), however, cultural assets also have significant ‘symbolic’ values that serve to differentiate the classes on the bases of aesthetic tastes and knowledge, reinforcing class boundaries and offering the cultural elite an alternative (or otherwise additional) set of goods for which to compete for ‘distinction’ (Bourdieu 1984). social or economic), however, cultural assets also have significant ‘symbolic’ values that serve to differentiate the classes on the bases of aesthetic tastes and knowledge, reinforcing class boundaries and offering the cultural elite an alternative (or otherwise additional) set of goods for which to compete for ‘distinction’ (Bourdieu 1984). social or economic), however, cultural assets also have significant ‘symbolic’ values that serve to differentiate the classes on the bases of aesthetic tastes and knowledge, reinforcing class boundaries and offering the cultural elite an alternative (or otherwise additional) set of goods for which to compete for ‘distinction’ (Bourdieu 1984). This tasks requires the utilization of over-time data and a hierarchical modeling procedure (Victora et al 1997). The communities – Hay el-Sollom, Naba’a, and Burj el-Barajneh refugee camp – were chosen purposefully on practical and substantive grounds including overall poverty conditions, lack of infrastructure, presence of rural immigrants or displaced populations, ease of sampling, and proximity to Beirut proper. Although the three communities shared common socio-economic features such as economic hardship and low income, they differed in their ethnic and religious make-up. Although the three communities shared common socio-economic features such as economic hardship and low income, they differed in their ethnic and religious make-up. Although the three communities shared common socio-economic features such as economic hardship and low income, they differed in their ethnic and religious make-up. In the first stage, a quick count of all housing units in the three communities was undertaken using area maps. Finally, a sample of PSUs was selected from each community, with a probability proportional to estimated population size for complete household listings. In the second stage, a sample of households was drawn systematically from the household lists of the selected PSUs in each community.The instrument consisted of two questionnaires: one for the household and one for ever-married women aged 15–59 at the time of the survey. The overall response rates were 88.3% and 77.8% for the household and women questionnaires, respectively. Perceived child health was measured by a direct question: “how would you assess his/her health: very good, good, bad, very bad.” For the analysis, the answers were dichotomized into good (very good or good health) and bad (bad or very bad health). Other characteristics of the mothers including health and socioeconomic status as well as structural and environmental conditions of the household/neighbourhood were included. Other characteristics of the mothers including health and socioeconomic status as well as structural and environmental conditions of the household/neighbourhood were included. Other characteristics of the mothers including health and socioeconomic status as well as structural and environmental conditions of the household/neighbourhood were included. Other characteristics of the mothers including health and socioeconomic status as well as structural and environmental conditions of the household/neighbourhood were included. Other characteristics of the mothers including health and socioeconomic status as well as structural and environmental conditions of the household/neighbourhood were included. Other characteristics of the mothers including health and socioeconomic status as well as structural and environmental conditions of the household/neighbourhood were included. Maternal-related VariablesFour indicators were used to measure cultural participation: exposure to entertainment TV programs, exposure to cultural/political TV programs, art production, and art consumption. For watching TV programs, we asked mothers how many times per month they watched any of the following types of programs: 1) drama or comedy 2) singing or dancing shows 3) folklore 4) news or political debates. Drama, comedy, singing and dancing shows were recoded as entertainment TV programs, and folklore programs along with the news or political debates were recoded as political/cultural TV programs.Participation in art production was constructed by combining the respondent’s replies to whether or not she 1) played a musical instrument, 2) participated in a singing show, play, or dance, 3) volunteered in cultural or artistic organization, and 4) made art objects or crafts like sculpture, paintings, etc… Answering “yes” to any of these activities indicates that the respondent was involved in doing artistic work, i.e. The consumption of art was measured by asking the respondents whether or not they go to movies or attend art exhibitions, regardless of type of exhibition or movie. The answer categories were combined into good (very good, good or fair) or bad (bad or very bad). The actual monetary family income was categorized as “lowest to 6000” and “6001 to highest.” Then, those in the low income category were subdivided as having “low income” and “low income on welfare”.Engagement in civil society groups was used as an indicator of social capital. Quality of water was measured by asking respondents whether or not they perceived the quality of potable and domestic water that they use as turbid or clear. Odds ratios and associated 95% confidence levels were calculated from logistic regressions for the association between perceived child health and each independent variable. Table 1 presents the characteristics of the sample and univariate descriptive statistics for the study variables. The vast majority of the respondents reported watching cultural/political TV programs and entertainment TV programs. The majority reported completing elementary levels (46%) or no education (19.8), and over half reported having low yearly income (less than 6 million L.L., 1,500 L.L=1 $). The bivariate associations between the independent variables mothers’ perceived health of their children were mixed. 