However, we excluded from enrollment in this study any participants who had significant histories of psychological conditions and/or treatments and therefore the present sample may underestimate distress in this population. This process allows assessments to be shorter and more accurate than static, paper-based versions (Gibbons et al  2016). This process allows assessments to be shorter and more accurate than static, paper-based versions (Gibbons et al  2016). This process allows assessments to be shorter and more accurate than static, paper-based versions (Gibbons et al  2016). Further sophistication in cognitive assessment may be brought about by the utilization of machine learning techniques to allow the quantification of natural language to identify cognitive functioning and deficits. However, our findings do support previous work suggesting that neuroimaging metrics may be superior to behavioral measures for predicting future cognitive outcomes (Gabrieli et al  2015). There are many options for each of these methods with no currently established standards. There are many options for each of these methods with no currently established standards. In conclusion, baseline neuroimaging may be useful for predicting patient reported cognitive outcomes including executive function and memory complaints. supplementary methods PROs are becoming increasingly appreciated as a means to comprehensively understanding cancer care and the impact cancer has on patients’ daily lives (Smith et al  2016). Given the discordance between objective and subjective cognitive measures, it is likely that different neural phenotypes underlie subjective and objective cognitive function, and therefore separate models are required to predict self-reported cognitive functioning. Patients included 42 who were scheduled for adjuvant chemotherapy and 34 who were not scheduled for chemotherapy. The Stanford University Institutional Review Board approved this study and all participants provided written informed consent (IRB #14623). We focused on the Global Executive Composite score from the BRIEF, the Total Score from the PRMQ and the CAD. Resting State fMRI Acquisition and PreprocessingRsfMRI data were acquired with a GE Discovery MR750 3.0 Tesla whole body scanner (GE Medical Systems) on the same day as the PRO-Cog questionnaires (see Supplemental Methods for further details). Data were preprocessed using Statistical Parametric Mapping 8 (Ashburner 2012) and CONN Toolbox (Whitfield-Gabrieli and Nieto-Castanon 2012) software. Prevalence rates for CRCI are even higher when self-report measures of cognitive functioning are used, with estimated prevalence in over three quarters of patients (i.e., 78% or more) (Bray et al  2018). Statistical AnalysisWe first examined differences in the slopes of BRIEF, PRMQ, and CAD scores between patient groups (chemotherapy and chemotherapy naïve) and healthy controls using standard mixed effects linear modeling controlling for baseline scores. Statistical AnalysisWe first examined differences in the slopes of BRIEF, PRMQ, and CAD scores between patient groups (chemotherapy and chemotherapy naïve) and healthy controls using standard mixed effects linear modeling controlling for baseline scores. We used maximum likelihood estimation implemented in R Statistical Package (R Foundation, Vienna, Austria) with the “lme4” library (Bates et al  2015). Data points missing due to participant attrition were handled assuming that data were missing at random. Significantly correlated edges (p < 0.05) were summed for each of 8 previously defined functional networks (Shen et al  2013) yielding a sparse set of 8 features that was then entered into a regression algorithm to predict BRIEF (or PRMQ) score. The p value for the correlation was calculated using two-tailed, Monte Carlo permutation testing. The p value for the correlation was calculated using two-tailed, Monte Carlo permutation testing. The p value for the correlation was calculated using two-tailed, Monte Carlo permutation testing. We evaluated four different regression models: linear regression according the general linear model, support vector machine regression (SVR) (Cortes and Vapnik 1995) (C = 1) with a linear kernel, SVR with a radial basis function (RBF) kernel, and random forest (RF) regression (Breiman 2001) (trees = 500, mtry = 3).Cross-validation results in a different model fit within each fold and thus it is not possible to determine precisely the coefficients or significance values for the features. Edge weights were compared by network membership between groups using analysis of variance (ANOVA). Participants were also administered an experimental battery of computerized tests during this study but these have not yet been validated or normed and therefore were not included.All analyses were conducted in the R Statistical Package using the “randomForest” and “e1071” libraries for random forest and SVR, respectively. PRMQ was significantly lower in patients with breast cancer compared to controls at 1-year follow-up (t = 5.13, p<0.001). Accurately predicting which individuals will develop this sequelae from traditional measures including clinical variables, self-reports, and behavioral assessments, including neuropsychological testing, is a challenge for researchers (Gabrieli et al  2015). The chemotherapy naïve group also differed significantly from controls in the visual 2 network. The chemotherapy naïve group also differed significantly from controls in the visual 2 network. Both groups of patients showed increased memory difficulties compared to controls. Both groups of patients showed increased memory difficulties compared to controls. The best performing models accounted for 46% of the variance in executive function and 19% of the variance in memory function. The hyperplane allows SVR to fit more complex models than traditional regression. The hyperplane allows SVR to fit more complex models than traditional regression. However, all of the connectome models performed quite similarly, and it is unlikely that they are significantly different from each other. Accordingly, we demonstrated that feature selected connectome edges differed significantly between patients and controls for six out of eight functional networks. These results also suggest that certain aspects of breast cancer and/or host factors have diffuse effects across the brain. These results also suggest that certain aspects of breast cancer and/or host factors have diffuse effects across the brain. 