Graham and Beller (2002) modeled child support payments as a classic prisoner’s dilemma game and predicted a noncooperative (low-spending) equilibrium because of parents’ mistrust. Graham and Beller (2002) modeled child support payments as a classic prisoner’s dilemma game and predicted a noncooperative (low-spending) equilibrium because of parents’ mistrust. Graham and Beller (2002) modeled child support payments as a classic prisoner’s dilemma game and predicted a noncooperative (low-spending) equilibrium because of parents’ mistrust. Similarly, Argys et al  (2001) found that paternity is significantly more likely to be established in states with stronger genetic-testing requirements, and the likelihood of a child-support award is significantly increased in states with higher and more effective child-support enforcement expenditures. TANF and SNAP participants, for example, are required to cooperate with the state OCSE’s attempts to locate nonresident parents, establish paternity and orders, and collect support. However, the mixed-status families that are already receiving TANF benefits are subject to the same program requirements to collaborate with child support agencies. However, the mixed-status families that are already receiving TANF benefits are subject to the same program requirements to collaborate with child support agencies. However, the mixed-status families that are already receiving TANF benefits are subject to the same program requirements to collaborate with child support agencies. Because formal child support paid to women currently or previously on TANF or SNAP is kept by the state to recoup welfare costs, low-income fathers and mothers may both prefer informal support to formal support (Roberts and Vinson 2004). In addition, regardless of mothers’ welfare status, fathers may prefer informal support because it may increase their ability to make decisions about child rearing and to monitor how their money is spent (Waller and Plotnick 2001). In addition, regardless of mothers’ welfare status, fathers may prefer informal support because it may increase their ability to make decisions about child rearing and to monitor how their money is spent (Waller and Plotnick 2001). It is thus prudent to examine citizenship status differentials in child support outcomes for children of low-income parents. It is thus prudent to examine citizenship status differentials in child support outcomes for children of low-income parents. However, there is little empirical evidence about how the “chilling effect” has worked to reduce immigrants’ willingness and ability to obtain governmental support. Using the Fragile Families data, Mincy and Nepomnyaschy (2005) found no statistically significant difference between the award probabilities of black and white unmarried parents. The authors also observed lower award probabilities among Hispanic fathers, but no difference in compliance rates between Hispanics and whites. In addition, Mincy and Nepomnyaschy (2005) included mother’s nativity as a control variable and found that U.S.-born mothers are significantly more likely than foreign-born mothers to have a child support order. We contribute to this literature by examining the mechanisms through which U.S.-born children of mixed-status families experience child support outcomes, and how legal status influences those outcomes. We contribute to this literature by examining the mechanisms through which U.S.-born children of mixed-status families experience child support outcomes, and how legal status influences those outcomes. We contribute to this literature by examining the mechanisms through which U.S.-born children of mixed-status families experience child support outcomes, and how legal status influences those outcomes. While the FFCWS has detailed information on the type of child support arrangements, there are some limitations in using these data to answer our research questions. While the FFCWS has detailed information on the type of child support arrangements, there are some limitations in using these data to answer our research questions. While the FFCWS has detailed information on the type of child support arrangements, there are some limitations in using these data to answer our research questions. While the FFCWS has detailed information on the type of child support arrangements, there are some limitations in using these data to answer our research questions. While the FFCWS has detailed information on the type of child support arrangements, there are some limitations in using these data to answer our research questions. However, 667 respondents dropped out by the 3-year follow up. However, 667 respondents dropped out by the 3-year follow up. Our final analysis sample consists of all 2,893 mothers for whom child support information was available. Our final analysis sample consists of all 2,893 mothers for whom child support information was available. Our final analysis sample consists of all 2,893 mothers for whom child support information was available. Our final analysis sample consists of all 2,893 mothers for whom child support information was available. We call this sample the child support eligible sample. Therefore, the mothers who were not married but were living together with the fathers are included in the analysis of paternity, but excluded from the analysis of the other three outcomes. There are 4,934 child support eligible respondents in the 2001 survey. There are 4,934 child support eligible respondents in the 2001 survey. For example, 67 mothers in the FFCWB study reported that they had a child support order, but that paternity was never established. For example, 67 mothers in the FFCWB study reported that they had a child support order, but that paternity was never established. We report only the results using the first coding method, in which we treat everyone who reported having a child support order as having paternity established. We made the assumption that all U.S.-born respondents are U.S. citizens. We made the assumption that all U.S.-born respondents are U.S. citizens. We made the assumption that all U.S.-born respondents are U.S. citizens. The legislative index includes laws covering genetic testing, paternity establishment, numerical guidelines, presumptive guidelines, wage withholdings under delinquency, immediate wage withholdings for new cases, universal wage withholdings, and state income tax fund interception (Huang et al  2004). The CPS measures that compose the CSE index are the percentage of mothers with child support received, the ratio of child support collections to child support guidelines, and the average support payment divided by the maximum AFDC/TANF benefit. State Welfare Generosity toward NoncitizensThe 1996 Personal Responsibility and Work Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) denied most types of federally funded means-tested assistance to noncitizens who arrived after 1996, and limited the eligibility of many noncitizens already living in the United States. Some states have extended benefits to legal resident noncitizens and others allow access to legal immigrants only after a period of U.S. residency, but none routinely give benefits to unauthorized immigrants.We use the Urban Institute’s index of state generosity toward noncitizens. Anti-Immigrant EnvironmentThere is no readily available measurement for the “chilling effect” of the anti-immigrant environment. There is a wide range of questions on contemporary policy issues, the current election of that year, and party identification and participation, as well as standard demographic and socio-economic status variables. These questions are only available in the FFCWS, and not available in the CPS-CSS, or any other nationally representative datasets. These questions are only available in the FFCWS, and not available in the CPS-CSS, or any other nationally representative datasets. The marginal effects presented should be interpreted as the change in the probability of the dependent variable associated with a discrete change in a binary independent variable and an incremental change in a continuous independent variable, holding all other variables at their means.Since we are using observational data and it is not possible to observe what the child support outcomes would have been if the mixed-status families were citizen families, we have to determine whether what we detect using regression models are the true impact of the immigration status. Following the counterfactual framework (Rubin 1977, Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983), we used propensity score matching (PSM) to select the best control matches (citizen families) for each individual in the treatment group (mixed-status families) based on all other preexisting observed characteristics. Following the counterfactual framework (Rubin 1977, Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983), we used propensity score matching (PSM) to select the best control matches (citizen families) for each individual in the treatment group (mixed-status families) based on all other preexisting observed characteristics. It assumes no selection bias based on unobserved characteristics. For example, immigrants in the United States might possess an unobserved or unmeasured characteristic that is fundamentally different from those of native U.S. citizens, such as the lack of self-advocacy. For example, immigrants in the United States might possess an unobserved or unmeasured characteristic that is fundamentally different from those of native U.S. citizens, such as the lack of self-advocacy. For example, immigrants in the United States might possess an unobserved or unmeasured characteristic that is fundamentally different from those of native U.S. citizens, such as the lack of self-advocacy. For example, immigrants in the United States might possess an unobserved or unmeasured characteristic that is fundamentally different from those of native U.S. citizens, such as the lack of self-advocacy. If this characteristic also impacts child support behaviors, causal claims based on matching results become questionable. We conducted sensitivity analysis using the 2001 CPS-CSS because the respondents were facing the same policy environments in terms of child support policy, immigration policy and welfare policy as the respondents of the FFCWS. In the CPS-CSS, custodial mothers, not nonresident fathers, report the child support information. In the CPS-CSS, custodial mothers, not nonresident fathers, report the child support information. In addition, CPS-CSS offers a far less extensive list of child support questions. In addition, CPS-CSS offers a far less extensive list of child support questions. In addition, CPS-CSS offers a far less extensive list of child support questions. In addition, CPS-CSS offers a far less extensive list of child support questions. The outcome variables are child support order, child support receipt, and in-kind child support. The outcome variables are child support order, child support receipt, and in-kind child support. The outcome variables are child support order, child support receipt, and in-kind child support. Descriptive StatisticsTable 3 shows the differences in child support outcomes between mixed-status families and citizen families. Probit Regression ResultsTable 4 reports the probit regression results of the determinants of paternity establishment and child support orders. Probit Regression ResultsTable 4 reports the probit regression results of the determinants of paternity establishment and child support orders. Probit Regression ResultsTable 4 reports the probit regression results of the determinants of paternity establishment and child support orders. Probit Regression ResultsTable 4 reports the probit regression results of the determinants of paternity establishment and child support orders. As expected, no statistically significant impact of legal status was found on paternity establishment. TANF participation since the focal child’s birth increases mixed-status families’ probability of having a child support order by almost 36 percent, and this impact is statistically significant at the 0.05 level. On the other hand, mothers who are in a steady relationship with the father are less likely to be in the formal child support system, but more likely to receive in-kind support from the father.Institutional factors such as state-level child support enforcement efforts significantly improve formal child support outcomes such as child support order and child support receipt. The anti-immigrant sentiment constructed from the ANES data also does not have a statistically significant impact on child support outcomes. The anti-immigrant sentiment constructed from the ANES data also does not have a statistically significant impact on child support outcomes. The anti-immigrant sentiment constructed from the ANES data also does not have a statistically significant impact on child support outcomes. The anti-immigrant sentiment constructed from the ANES data also does not have a statistically significant impact on child support outcomes. The caveat however is that mixed-status families are less likely to use TANF, and TANF has a large positive effect on child support outcomes. Propensity Score Matching ResultsAppendix A presents the covariate balance between the treatment group and the control group before and after matching. Propensity Score Matching ResultsAppendix A presents the covariate balance between the treatment group and the control group before and after matching. All of the group differences become insignificant after matching, indicating a high quality match. All of the group differences become insignificant after matching, indicating a high quality match. All of the group differences become insignificant after matching, indicating a high quality match. Fourth, the study makes a methodological contribution by carefully considering the possibility of self-selection in the migration process and its bias associated with observed and unobserved heterogeneity among low-income immigrants. Very little empirical evidence exists on immigrants’ participation in the child support system in the United States This is regrettable because children of immigrants represent the fastest growing share of children in the United States. Since mixed-status families have a greater risk of being poor and are less likely to be eligible for federally funded welfare programs such as TANF, SNAP, EITC, or Medicaid, the child support system represents one of the few possibilities that these low-income custodial parents have for obtaining financial support to raise their children. We expect this number to continue rising rapidly given the fertility trend of immigrants in the United States and the decline in marriage rates. Nevertheless, the proportion of families with a formal child support order is low, especially in mixed-status families. First, we did not have detailed immigration status information, so we could not investigate whether undocumented immigrant parents behave differently than legal immigrant parents. The dummy variable child support payment does not capture the differences in the amount of child support received. In 2011, nearly 41 percent of all births in the United States in 2009 occurred outside marriage, up from 33.2 percent in 2000 and 18.4 percent in 1980 (Martin et al  2011). It is estimated that between 40 and 60 percent of new marriages will eventually end in divorce (Williams, Sawyer et al  2006). The Child Support Enforcement (CSE) program, under Title IV-D of the Social Security Act (1975) tries to improve child well-being by establishing paternity, setting medical and financial support orders, and enforcing those orders through a federal, state, and local partnership. The Child Support Enforcement (CSE) program, under Title IV-D of the Social Security Act (1975) tries to improve child well-being by establishing paternity, setting medical and financial support orders, and enforcing those orders through a federal, state, and local partnership. The Child Support Enforcement (CSE) program, under Title IV-D of the Social Security Act (1975) tries to improve child well-being by establishing paternity, setting medical and financial support orders, and enforcing those orders through a federal, state, and local partnership. The Child Support Enforcement (CSE) program, under Title IV-D of the Social Security Act (1975) tries to improve child well-being by establishing paternity, setting medical and financial support orders, and enforcing those orders through a federal, state, and local partnership. Cash assistance now constitutes a substantially smaller share of the income of poor custodial families. There is an extensive literature on child support because of its importance in modern American society and its use as a policy tool to combat child poverty. There is an extensive literature on child support because of its importance in modern American society and its use as a policy tool to combat child poverty. There is an extensive literature on child support because of its importance in modern American society and its use as a policy tool to combat child poverty. There is an extensive literature on child support because of its importance in modern American society and its use as a policy tool to combat child poverty. In addition, to recoup part of the costs of public benefits, Congress requires the recipients of public assistance to cooperate with efforts to establish paternity. Therefore, the probability of having a child support order is higher for mothers who received TANF or Food Stamps before the child’s birth (Mincy, Garfinkel et al  2005).When a child support order is set, the amount of the order is automatically withheld from the earnings of the noncustodial parent and sent by the employer to a centralized processing agency. This may be especially true for many noncitizens without proper documentation who live in the shadows to avoid deportation. Informal support, especially the purchase of goods and services for the child, appears to be very common (Edin and Lein 1997, McLanahan, Garfinkel et al  2001). Securing a child support order and obtaining child support payments may involve a substantial amount of time and perseverance on the part of custodial mothers. Securing a child support order and obtaining child support payments may involve a substantial amount of time and perseverance on the part of custodial mothers. Securing a child support order and obtaining child support payments may involve a substantial amount of time and perseverance on the part of custodial mothers. Securing a child support order and obtaining child support payments may involve a substantial amount of time and perseverance on the part of custodial mothers. 