Stimulation of Fas with Fas ligand (FasL) or TRAIL-R1/2 receptors with TRAIL induces the recruitment of FADD and formation of the death-inducing signaling complex (DISC) (9). Immunoblot analysis of adsorbates with anti-His showed that MUC1-CD binds to caspase-8 (Fig. To define the region of caspase-8 that interacts with MUCl-CD, we incubated GST fusion proteins of caspase-8 fragments with His-MUC1-CD. MUC1 is translated as a single polypeptide that undergoes autoproteolysis into two subunits in the endoplasmic reticulum (11-13). Notably, however, TRAIL treatment was associated with recruitment of MUC1-C to the DISC (Fig. Notably, however, TRAIL treatment was associated with recruitment of MUC1-C to the DISC (Fig. Recruitment of MUC1-C to the DISC was attenuated by silencing FADD (Fig. To define the region of FADD that confers the interaction, we incubated GST-FADD or GST-FADD deletion mutants (Fig. These binding studies confirmed the direct interaction between MUC1-CD and FADD and further demonstrated that, like caspase-8, MUC1-CD interacts with the FADD DED and not the DD (Fig. These findings were attributed to localization of MUC1-C to the mitochondrial outer membrane with a block in Bid-induced release of apoptogenic factors and thereby the extrinsic pathway (22). These findings were attributed to localization of MUC1-C to the mitochondrial outer membrane with a block in Bid-induced release of apoptogenic factors and thereby the extrinsic pathway (22). However, the present results demonstrate that MUC1 blocks TRAIL-induced signaling upstream to Bid by inhibiting caspase-8 activation. In concert with these results, MUC1 blocked death receptor-induced apoptosis in diverse cell models. In concert with these results, MUC1 blocked death receptor-induced apoptosis in diverse cell models. In concert with these results, MUC1 blocked death receptor-induced apoptosis in diverse cell models. In concert with these results, MUC1 blocked death receptor-induced apoptosis in diverse cell models. The basis for the discrepancy of those and the present results are not clear, but may relate to the expression of a MUC1 fusion protein that affects MUC1 function or the upregulation of Fas in these models. The present results demonstrate that, like cFLIPL, MUC1-C interacts directly with caspase-8-p18 (amino acids 270-322) and that this interaction is conferred by amino acids 1-20 of MUC1-CD (Fig. Caspase-8-p18 contains the catalytic Cys-360 residue that is directly inhibited by the p35 protein from baculovirus (42). Moreover, unlike p35, incubation of active recombinant caspase-8 with stoichiometric concentrations of MUC1-CD in vitro had little effect on caspase-8 activity (data not shown). Binding of cFLIP to caspase-8 blocks caspase-8 dimerization and the processing of caspase-8 to the p18 and p10 fragments (44). MUC1-C consists of a 58 amino acid extracellular domain, a 28 amino acid transmembrane domain and a 72 amino acid cytoplasmic domain (25). Direct binding studies further showed that MUC1-CD(46-72) confers the interaction with FADD. cFLIP competes with caspase-8 for recruitment to the DISC (41, 48-50). The MUC1 cytoplasmic domain (MUC1-CD) functions as a substrate for c-Src (26), glycogen synthase kinase 3β (27), protein kinase Cδ(28) and c-Abl (29). For example, studies in MCF-10A cells demonstrated little constitutive interaction between MUC1-C and FADD or caspase-8. Moreover, MUC1 attenuated death receptor-induced activation of caspase-8 in the MCF-10A cells. Moreover, MUC1 attenuated death receptor-induced activation of caspase-8 in the MCF-10A cells. In contrast to nonmalignant cells, MUC1 is aberrantly overexpressed by most human carcinomas and certain hematologic malignancies (10, 51, 52). Overexpression of MUC1 as found in human carcinomas and certain hematologic malignancies induces transformation and resistance to apoptosis induced by genotoxic agents, reactive oxygen species and hypoxia (16, 18, 20, 22, 29, 32-34). Overexpression of MUC1 as found in human carcinomas and certain hematologic malignancies induces transformation and resistance to apoptosis induced by genotoxic agents, reactive oxygen species and hypoxia (16, 18, 20, 22, 29, 32-34). Overexpression of MUC1 as found in human carcinomas and certain hematologic malignancies induces transformation and resistance to apoptosis induced by genotoxic agents, reactive oxygen species and hypoxia (16, 18, 20, 22, 29, 32-34). Cells were treated with TRAIL (Calbiochem, San Diego, CA), Flag-tagged TRAIL (Axxora, San Diego, CA), TNFα (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) and FasL (CH11; Upstate Biotechnology Inc., Lake Placid, NY). The extrinsic apoptotic pathway is activated by ligand stimulation of the tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα) receptor superfamily of death receptors. The extrinsic apoptotic pathway is activated by ligand stimulation of the tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα) receptor superfamily of death receptors. Immunoprecipitation, DISC isolation and immunoblot analysisCells were lysed by sonication in the presence of 10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM EDTA, 0.5% NP-40, 100 μg/ml phenylmethylsulphonyl fluoride and protease inhibitor mixture. In vitro caspase-8 activity assayCaspase-8 activity was assayed using the BD ApoAlert Caspase-8 Colorimetric Assay Kit and IETD-pNA(p-nitroaniline) as substrate (BD Bioscience). Apoptosis assaysCells were fixed in 70% ethanol and incubated in PBS containing 50 μg/ml RNase and 2.5 μg/ml propidium iodide. The percentage of cells with sub-G1 DNA was determined by the MODFIT LT Program (Verity Software, Topsham, ME). Cells were also suspended in Annexin-V-FLOUS containing propidium iodide (Roche) and analyzed by flow cytometry. As compared to BC-1 cells infected with a lentivirus expressing a control siRNA (CsiRNA), MUC1-C expression was stably downregulated by the MUC1siRNA#1 (Fig. The inhibitory effect of MUC1 on the apoptotic response to FasL was confirmed in repeated experiments with BC-1 cells expressing MUC1siRNA#1 and MUC1siRNA#2 (Fig. These findings indicate that MUC1 attenuates death receptor-induced activation of caspase-8 and apoptosis. These findings indicate that MUC1 attenuates death receptor-induced activation of caspase-8 and apoptosis. Moreover, expression of MUC1-C abrogated sensitivity to TNFα- and FasL-induced apoptosis (Fig. These responses were confirmed with both U-937/MUC1-C clones and in repeated experiments (Fig. These responses were confirmed with both U-937/MUC1-C clones and in repeated experiments (Fig. The inhibitory effects of MUC1 were confirmed by direct measurement of caspase-8 activity (Fig. The inhibitory effects of MUC1 were confirmed by direct measurement of caspase-8 activity (Fig. 