Such thin PEG layers reduce the amount of unwanted proteins at interfaces to a minimum which does not influence cell adhesion.19–22 Following the passivation, the gold nanoparticles are functionalized with the molecule of interest. Previous studies showed that the PEG2000-silane monolayer on the glass surfaces has a height of ~2 nm in a dried state and up to 5 nm in a hydrated state.15 Therefore, in a hydrated state the gold nanoparticles (of 8 nm in diameter) on the thermally tempered passivated glass surfaces are protruding slightly above (~1 to 2 nm) the surrounding PEG layer. In such conditions, the spherical cap surface area of the nanoparticle, which can be occupied by molecules, ranges between 25 and 50 nm2.49, 50 On the hydrogel surfaces, a similar or even slightly larger occupied surface area is obtained. In such conditions, the spherical cap surface area of the nanoparticle, which can be occupied by molecules, ranges between 25 and 50 nm2.49, 50 On the hydrogel surfaces, a similar or even slightly larger occupied surface area is obtained. where R is the gas constant, T is the temperature, φ is the volume fraction of the polymer and Ne is the number of moles of elastically effective network chains (i.e., cross-link chains) in volume V. The theory is based on the assumption that every network chain ends in a cross-link, and no loops or trapped entanglements exist. Based on these observations, one can claim that the “real” stiffness of PEG700-DA hydrogels should be considered as 1.25 MPa and compared to 64 GPa65 of the passivated glass surface. Based on these observations, one can claim that the “real” stiffness of PEG700-DA hydrogels should be considered as 1.25 MPa and compared to 64 GPa65 of the passivated glass surface. We could show previously that KG-1a cells bind to the cRGD-motif of the extracellular matrix protein fibronectin via integrins.37 Upon adhesion to nanostructured cRGD-functionalized surfaces, KG-1a cells were observed by SEM to have a roundish morphology that is typical for non-anchorage dependent cells (Figure 6 A, D). This indicates that the particles were not released or moved by the cells during the experiment.In Figure 7 KG–1a cell adhesion to the different substrate sets at varying ligand spacings is compared. This critical maximum distance depends on the cell type since it differs for anchorage-dependent and non-anchorage-dependent cells.37 The distance-dependency on the nanometer range is assumed to result from the composition and geometric arrangement of protein complexes that form the adhesive sites of the cell.1Fibroblast (REF52) cells were investigated in this study to assess the impact of the different surface properties of the two substrate sets on the anchorage-dependent cell adhesion behavior. It is evident that REF52 cells spread very well on both hydrogel and glass surfaces with the 62 nm patterns, showing their typical morphology and focal adhesion distribution which are mainly restricted to the periphery of the cells (Figure 9). This was achieved by a combination of BCML with transfer lithography based on poly(ethylene glycol)-diacrylate (PEG-DA) polymerization.16, 31, 35 In a previous study we presented a cell biology approach to this substrate system where crucial parameters such as substrate compliance, the spacing and density of numerous biomolecules can be varied fully independently from each other.31 However, in order to understand how these nanopatterned hydrogels may affect cell adhesion, it is important to determine and characterize the specific surface properties including topography, stiffness and chemistry. At 162 nm patterns limited cell spreading was observed on both substrate sets.Immunofluorescence microscopy was used to examine if the recruitment of integrin-associated molecules is dependent on the lateral spacings between the integrin ligands. At 162 nm patterns limited cell spreading was observed on both substrate sets.Immunofluorescence microscopy was used to examine if the recruitment of integrin-associated molecules is dependent on the lateral spacings between the integrin ligands. At 162 nm patterns limited cell spreading was observed on both substrate sets.Immunofluorescence microscopy was used to examine if the recruitment of integrin-associated molecules is dependent on the lateral spacings between the integrin ligands. However, the prominence of zyxin in focal adhesions formed on the 62 nm pattern glass surfaces was lower (~50%) than that measured on hydrogels.Although the two sets of nanostructured materials compared here (hydrogels and glass substrates) were identical in terms of ligand type, nanoparticle spacing and geometry, their abilities to promote KG-1a and REF52 cell adhesion differed. Therefore, we could verify our initial hypothesis that at constant ligand type and spacing the observed cell behavior is influenced by the physical surface properties of PEG hydrogels and PEG-passivated glasses. The hypothesis that the different surface properties of the two substrate sets impact cell behavior was verified by demonstrating the different adhesive behavior of non-anchorage-dependent KG-1a and anchorage-dependent REF52 cells on nanostructured hydrogel and passivated glass surfaces. In both cases the gold nanoparticles with a diameter of ca.8 nm and with spacings adjustable between 20 and 160 nm were functionalized with cyclic arginine-glycine-aspartic acid peptide (cRGD), which serves as an adhesive recognition sequence for many integrins and is present in fibronectin and other ECM proteins.2, 35 Additionally, the adhesion behavior of hematopoietic KG-1a cells and of rat embryonic fibroblast (REF52) cells was tested on both surfaces. Passivation of Nanopatterned Glass SurfacesPassivation of glass surfaces was obtained by first activating the surfaces with oxygen plasma (0.4 mbar O2; 150 W, 10 min). Passivation of Nanopatterned Glass SurfacesPassivation of glass surfaces was obtained by first activating the surfaces with oxygen plasma (0.4 mbar O2; 150 W, 10 min). Passivation of Nanopatterned Glass SurfacesPassivation of glass surfaces was obtained by first activating the surfaces with oxygen plasma (0.4 mbar O2; 150 W, 10 min). Passivation of Nanopatterned Glass SurfacesPassivation of glass surfaces was obtained by first activating the surfaces with oxygen plasma (0.4 mbar O2; 150 W, 10 min). Passivation of Nanopatterned Glass SurfacesPassivation of glass surfaces was obtained by first activating the surfaces with oxygen plasma (0.4 mbar O2; 150 W, 10 min). Fabrication of Nanostructured PEG HydrogelsThe nanoparticles on the nanostructured glass substrates were transferred to PEG700-DA hydrogels (molecular weight 700 g/mol) according to Aydin et al 31 Since the swelling ratio of PEG700-DA hydrogels was ~1, the spacing between the gold nanoparticles remained unmodified.31 As a quality control 50% of the nanopatterned hydrogels were investigated and characterized by Cryo SEM and indentation measurements (see the following sections). Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and Cryo-SEMA Zeiss Ultra 55 field emission electron microscope (FE-SEM) equipped with in-lens, secondary electron (SE) and angle selective backscattered electron (ASB) detectors was used for image acquisition (Zeiss SMT, Oberkochen, Germany). Tipples, silicon cantilevers (CSC 12 tipples no Al; μmasch, Estonia) were simultaneously cleaned and activated for 5 min with reactive oxygen plasma (0.4 mbar O2; 150 W). Tipples, silicon cantilevers (CSC 12 tipples no Al; μmasch, Estonia) were simultaneously cleaned and activated for 5 min with reactive oxygen plasma (0.4 mbar O2; 150 W). The most suitable modification of the Hertz theory for a SPM tip-sample system was introduced by Sneddon40 describing an infinitely hard indenter with a special geometry and flat, homogeneous and semi-infinite elastic deformable substrate.41, 42 In this case, the total force F is a function of the indentation δ and is described by: The most suitable modification of the Hertz theory for a SPM tip-sample system was introduced by Sneddon40 describing an infinitely hard indenter with a special geometry and flat, homogeneous and semi-infinite elastic deformable substrate.41, 42 In this case, the total force F is a function of the indentation δ and is described by: The most suitable modification of the Hertz theory for a SPM tip-sample system was introduced by Sneddon40 describing an infinitely hard indenter with a special geometry and flat, homogeneous and semi-infinite elastic deformable substrate.41, 42 In this case, the total force F is a function of the indentation δ and is described by: Therefore, in order to accurately derive the Young modulus of the PEG700-DA hydrogel samples, force distance curves were recorded from 50 different locations on the hydrogels surfaces with about 20 force curves per location (4 curves for each one of the 5 tested rates of tip approach 0.01, 0.1, 0.2, 1 and 2 μm/sec) and fitted to the modified Hertz model.41, 42, 44On the glass surfaces the scanning probe micrographs were recorded with a “Nano Wizard II” SPM commercially provided by JPK Instruments AG (Berlin, Germany) applying intermittent contact mode.45, 46 Glass substrates were measured in a dry state using hard, backside-coated silicon cantilevers (Applied NanoStructures Inc., Santa Clara, USA; ACTA; k = 40 N m−1). Functionalization of Gold NanoparticlesTo provide cell adhesion on the nanostructured PEG700-DA and PEG2000-silane passivated substrates, c(RGDfK)-PEG6-cysteine or c(RGDfK)-Ahx-thiol were immobilized on gold nanopatterns. Cells were then permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS, blocked with 5% goat serum (Invitrogen, Germany) in PBS for 1 h at room temperature and incubated with 1:100 dilution of mouse anti-paxillin (Abcam, USA) and with 1:100 dilution of rabbit anti-zyxin (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) for 1 h at room temperature. Surface Texture of PEG700-DA Hydrogels and PEG Passivated GlassesGlass cover slips were decorated with a quasi-hexagonally ordered gold nanoparticles array, featuring defined interparticle spacings between 20 and 160 nm. Moreover, the isotropic swelling of the PEG700-DA hydrogel with a swelling ratio of almost 1 did not severely affect the spacings, ranging from 59 ± 9 nm and 62 ± 11 nm on the glass and hydrogel surfaces, respectively.To assess the morphology of the nanopatterned hydrogel and glass surfaces, we used the information obtained from cryo-SEM and SEM micrographs. Moreover, the isotropic swelling of the PEG700-DA hydrogel with a swelling ratio of almost 1 did not severely affect the spacings, ranging from 59 ± 9 nm and 62 ± 11 nm on the glass and hydrogel surfaces, respectively.To assess the morphology of the nanopatterned hydrogel and glass surfaces, we used the information obtained from cryo-SEM and SEM micrographs. Gold nanostructure surfaces generated by BCML have been studied for their stability in cell culture conditions and therefore widely applied to study cell adhesion.1, 15–18 In order to avoid unspecific deposition of proteins from the cell media to a glass or SiO2-wafer, the surface between the gold nanoparticles is passivated with a PEG-silane monolayer. In contrast to the glass substrates, quantification of the exposure of the gold nanoparticles on the PEG hydrogel surfaces by means of AFM at low forces in order not to destroy the PEG layer was not possible. In contrast to the glass substrates, quantification of the exposure of the gold nanoparticles on the PEG hydrogel surfaces by means of AFM at low forces in order not to destroy the PEG layer was not possible. In contrast to the glass substrates, quantification of the exposure of the gold nanoparticles on the PEG hydrogel surfaces by means of AFM at low forces in order not to destroy the PEG layer was not possible. 