By this study, the authors claimed that in the rural area in Bangladesh, the ratio of the prevalence of ASD is 0.75/1000. Khan et al  developed an autism spectrum disorder (ASD) intervention application named MyHeifer [36]. This table describes the timeline (2 years or 24 months) of mCARE’s phases including the method names and participant numbers (here C for Caregiver and P for Practitioner). At the end of the study, the research coordinators were responsible for analyzing and publishing the significant result and findings. In our study, some parallel tasks (in phase ii and iii) were done based on the demand for this project’s progress in the project timeline (shown in Table 1). This study took place at 4 major institutes of Bangladesh in two geographical locations—Dhaka and Chittagong. Moreover, each group was divided equally in test (25) and control (25) groups. Information from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) shows the pervasiveness of ASD is roughly one of every 54 children. Information from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) shows the pervasiveness of ASD is roughly one of every 54 children. The participants were divided into two groups—mCARE-APP (50) and mCARE-SMS (50). The participants were divided into two groups—mCARE-APP (50) and mCARE-SMS (50). The participants were divided into two groups—mCARE-APP (50) and mCARE-SMS (50). Each group was further divided equally in the test (25) and control (25) groups. Each group was further divided equally in the test (25) and control (25) groups. Each group was further divided equally in the test (25) and control (25) groups. Each group was further divided equally in the test (25) and control (25) groups. The power analysis yields that the sample size of 300 is sufficient to discover a difference among mCARE-SMS, mCARE-APP, and the control groups with the power of 0.97 at α = 0.05 and the medium effect size. One of the challenges mentioned by the caregivers is that they did not have an idea of what to achieve next after a certain point. We sent a bi-weekly progress report to the caregivers whose content was finalized based on caregiver and care practitioner input. We recorded the proper consent from the caregivers with their information in the data collection phase. On the consent form, we included information on what data we would be collecting from them over the one-year project span of mCARE. On the consent form, we included information on what data we would be collecting from them over the one-year project span of mCARE. On the consent form, we included information on what data we would be collecting from them over the one-year project span of mCARE. On the consent form, we included information on what data we would be collecting from them over the one-year project span of mCARE. On the consent form, we included information on what data we would be collecting from them over the one-year project span of mCARE. On the consent form, we included information on what data we would be collecting from them over the one-year project span of mCARE. In Bangladesh, social-cultural-financial constraints and a scarcity of mental health care practitioners have deprived families raising children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) from regular monitoring, care, and support [12–15]. A screenshot of mCARE: DMP view for IPNA is shown in Figure 2. Weekly meetings included all four clinical coordinators, our research group members, and the co-principal and principal investigator (PI and CO-PI). Weekly meetings included all four clinical coordinators, our research group members, and the co-principal and principal investigator (PI and CO-PI). Weekly meetings included all four clinical coordinators, our research group members, and the co-principal and principal investigator (PI and CO-PI). Figure 3 shows the weekly comparison line graph for all four centers (from 19-12-2019 to 29-07-2020). Figure 3 shows the weekly comparison line graph for all four centers (from 19-12-2019 to 29-07-2020). Figure 3 shows the weekly comparison line graph for all four centers (from 19-12-2019 to 29-07-2020). Figure 4 shows the center wise (IPNA) data representation generated by mCARE: DMP for every week. Phase 3: ResultThe overall outcome of this work is to create a historical dataset for children with ASD, which helps care practitioners develop treatment plans using evidence-based decision making. EVOLUTION OF mCARE After starting the data collection phase, we encountered some issues and made adjustments to update our system. After starting the data collection phase, we encountered some issues and made adjustments to update our system. Bi-weekly report generation: In the initial stages of the development of mCARE, there was no option to provide the patient’s progress report to their parents from the system. Figure 5a,b shows a screenshot of a progress report for a patient.Update the SMS pattern: For SMS users of mCARE, initially there was a format, comma (,) separate input, for taking the parents’ feedback to the system. After an investigation by the center coordinator, we found that particular patient was registered with his father’s phone number. After an investigation by the center coordinator, we found that particular patient was registered with his father’s phone number. After an investigation by the center coordinator, we found that particular patient was registered with his father’s phone number. To ease the process, clinical coordinators from their respective centers were permitted to edit patient data, add alternate phone numbers, edit behavioral and milestone parameters and their frequency, and reset the password for the app.Update the Behavioral parameters based on the scoring: The clinical coordinator can change the behavioral parameter based on their treatment purpose. To ease the process, clinical coordinators from their respective centers were permitted to edit patient data, add alternate phone numbers, edit behavioral and milestone parameters and their frequency, and reset the password for the app.Update the Behavioral parameters based on the scoring: The clinical coordinator can change the behavioral parameter based on their treatment purpose. To ease the process, clinical coordinators from their respective centers were permitted to edit patient data, add alternate phone numbers, edit behavioral and milestone parameters and their frequency, and reset the password for the app.Update the Behavioral parameters based on the scoring: The clinical coordinator can change the behavioral parameter based on their treatment purpose. Caring for children with ASD is challenging and impacts family life [28,29]. In the test group, the behavioral data were collected daily by mCARE: APP or mCARE: SMS. Repetitive activity (such as spinning a pencil/ hand flapping)Inflexible to changeRepetition of same wordUse of meaningless wordUse of pronouns inappropriately (such as “I” instead of “you”)Use of unnatural sounds (e.g., high pitch squeal)Can s/he start social interactions? Repetitive activity (such as spinning a pencil/ hand flapping)Inflexible to changeRepetition of same wordUse of meaningless wordUse of pronouns inappropriately (such as “I” instead of “you”)Use of unnatural sounds (e.g., high pitch squeal)Can s/he start social interactions? At the start of the study, the impact of sleep problems for the test group was high; at the end of the study, the impact was significantly reduced, but for the control group this parameter was constant. At the start of the study, the impact of sleep problems for the test group was high; at the end of the study, the impact was significantly reduced, but for the control group this parameter was constant. At the start of the study, the impact of sleep problems for the test group was high; at the end of the study, the impact was significantly reduced, but for the control group this parameter was constant. Similarly, Figure 6b shows a positive impact behavioral change, “Does s/he respond when called by name?” In this case, we observed that there was a low response at the start of the study for that test group patient, but over the course of the project, the response was gradually increased, which was a positive impact for that child. Similarly, Figure 6b shows a positive impact behavioral change, “Does s/he respond when called by name?” In this case, we observed that there was a low response at the start of the study for that test group patient, but over the course of the project, the response was gradually increased, which was a positive impact for that child. Similarly, Figure 6b shows a positive impact behavioral change, “Does s/he respond when called by name?” In this case, we observed that there was a low response at the start of the study for that test group patient, but over the course of the project, the response was gradually increased, which was a positive impact for that child. Similarly, Figure 6b shows a positive impact behavioral change, “Does s/he respond when called by name?” In this case, we observed that there was a low response at the start of the study for that test group patient, but over the course of the project, the response was gradually increased, which was a positive impact for that child. Figure 7 shows a screenshot of a tip where the message was “It is good to know that: ASD children are not negative or incomplete by any anathema or willingness. Figure 7 shows a screenshot of a tip where the message was “It is good to know that: ASD children are not negative or incomplete by any anathema or willingness. Figure 7 shows a screenshot of a tip where the message was “It is good to know that: ASD children are not negative or incomplete by any anathema or willingness. Figure 7 shows a screenshot of a tip where the message was “It is good to know that: ASD children are not negative or incomplete by any anathema or willingness. In all centers, the improvement level in Daily Living skills was higher than other milestone parameters. In all centers, the improvement level in Daily Living skills was higher than other milestone parameters. Figure 9 shows that parents with higher levels of education, where fathers did service and mothers were housewives, their children showed more improvement than others. Another important finding from the milestone parameter is that the participants who attended a specialized school showed greater improvement than others. As our sample size was 150, we have used the “Z” value (1.96 for 95% CI) [59] for calculating the 95% CI using the following formula: As our sample size was 150, we have used the “Z” value (1.96 for 95% CI) [59] for calculating the 95% CI using the following formula: From the Tables 4 and 5, since we have 150 participants, we can improve the result statistically significant by increasing participant number in future. For example, in “Daily Living Skill” the 95% CI for test group is from 26.1 to 30.4 and for control group it is from 22.9 to 27.6. For example, in “Daily Living Skill” the 95% CI for test group is from 26.1 to 30.4 and for control group it is from 22.9 to 27.6. Furthermore, due to the pandemic of COVID-19, the mCARE system was perfect for monitoring participants through remote methods. The system performed well with the social and economic constraints that the pandemic placed on participants. We found a number of impacts directly related to COVID-19 on the participants and caregivers through the mCARE system. Without mCARE, we would not have that data. One broadly acknowledged conduct approach is applied behavioral analysis, in which positive and negative behaviors are encouraged and discouraged, respectively [36]. One broadly acknowledged conduct approach is applied behavioral analysis, in which positive and negative behaviors are encouraged and discouraged, respectively [36]. One broadly acknowledged conduct approach is applied behavioral analysis, in which positive and negative behaviors are encouraged and discouraged, respectively [36]. When some parents did not see improvement immediately, they were sometimes demotivated. An increasing amount of research indicates strong possibilities for the use of digital interventions to support the management of the autism using computers, smartphones, wearable technologies, virtual reality, robotics and tablets [38]. mCARE is customizable to fit each child’s specific parameter monitoring requirements. mCARE is customizable to fit each child’s specific parameter monitoring requirements. mCARE is customizable to fit each child’s specific parameter monitoring requirements. During the last 50 years the worldwide predominance of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) has expanded 20–30-fold. During the last 50 years the worldwide predominance of Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) has expanded 20–30-fold. Therefore, it will expand the reach of mental health care to those who previously had little or no access. Therefore, it will expand the reach of mental health care to those who previously had little or no access. Therefore, it will expand the reach of mental health care to those who previously had little or no access. At the end of March 2019, the number of mobile phone subscribers reached 159.780 million in Bangladesh [47]. At the end of March 2019, the number of mobile phone subscribers reached 159.780 million in Bangladesh [47]. As Bangladesh is a developing country, many people do not have access to smartphones; instead, they use feature phones. This interactive automated and 3D scenario-based application used Childhood Autism Spectrum Test (CAST), and Cross-Cultural Translation & Validation model, and employed 39 questions and some 3D characters and scenarios for detecting autism in children aged 3–11 years in Bangladesh. In [49], Kim et al  summarize and categorize all smartphone applications for Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) from the Autism Speaks official website [50]. This study was done at 11 Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring (ADDM) sites in the United States. To determine ASD case status, all information was systematically examined by experienced clinicians. 