Macrophages are identified by their large cell size, the tendency to engulf varying amounts of lipid droplets as well as the presence of cholesterol-like crystalline inclusions (Fig. A quantitative morphometry analysis confirmed that there was significant difference (P= 0.0286) between the ATP-vesicles–treated group (14.3 ± 2.7 capillaries/field) and the saline-treated group (5.5 ± 1.2 capillaries/field). A quantitative morphometry analysis confirmed that there was significant difference (P= 0.0286) between the ATP-vesicles–treated group (14.3 ± 2.7 capillaries/field) and the saline-treated group (5.5 ± 1.2 capillaries/field). A quantitative morphometry analysis confirmed that there was significant difference (P= 0.0286) between the ATP-vesicles–treated group (14.3 ± 2.7 capillaries/field) and the saline-treated group (5.5 ± 1.2 capillaries/field). A quantitative morphometry analysis confirmed that there was significant difference (P= 0.0286) between the ATP-vesicles–treated group (14.3 ± 2.7 capillaries/field) and the saline-treated group (5.5 ± 1.2 capillaries/field). A quantitative morphometry analysis confirmed that there was significant difference (P= 0.0286) between the ATP-vesicles–treated group (14.3 ± 2.7 capillaries/field) and the saline-treated group (5.5 ± 1.2 capillaries/field). Our hypothesis is that if ATP can be delivered into the cytosol, the wound-healing process will be greatly enhanced. In this study, specially formulated and highly fusogenic small unilamellar lipid vesicles (with diameters of 120–160 nm) were used for intracellular Mg-ATP delivery. Although free ATP degrades quickly in the blood circulation, the encapsulation of drugs in the lipid vesicles can significantly extend its life.28 Our freeze-dried ATP-vesicles can be kept for 6 to 12 months without degradation. The extremely fast granular tissues growth caused by intracellular ATP delivery is a very unique and very surprising finding. The extremely fast granular tissues growth caused by intracellular ATP delivery is a very unique and very surprising finding. The extremely fast granular tissues growth caused by intracellular ATP delivery is a very unique and very surprising finding. The extremely fast granular tissues growth caused by intracellular ATP delivery is a very unique and very surprising finding. To our knowledge, there has never been any report in the medical literature that shows such fast granular tissue growth by any other drugs. To our knowledge, there has never been any report in the medical literature that shows such fast granular tissue growth by any other drugs. To our knowledge, there has never been any report in the medical literature that shows such fast granular tissue growth by any other drugs. We are not sure which cells will benefit most. However, the application of ATP-vesicles resulted in a significantly decreased wound area, especially within the first 1 to 5 days in nonischemic wounds and 3 to 7 days in ischemic wounds. This period correlates with skin contraction, macrophage stimulation, fibroblast proliferation, and other fibroblast-dependant activities, such as collagen synthesis and extracellular matrix production.31 ATP-vesicles seem to benefit all of these factors during the healing process. However, angiogenesis is induced by many factors and VEGF alone is not enough. Another important factor is the involvement of pro- and anti-inflammatory cytokines.38 In a similar study using a rabbit ear wound model, it was found that the expression of several proinflammatory cytokines (IL-1β, MCP-1, and TNF-α) was significantly upregulated only 1 day after wounding (unpublished data). This fast upregulation appeared to coincide with the time of the extremely fast granular tissue growth. This fast upregulation appeared to coincide with the time of the extremely fast granular tissue growth. The technique for wound treatment reported here is easy to apply, has minimal expense, and has low toxicity. We have to point out that the use of small unilamellar vesicles is not our innovation, nor is the encapsulation of ATP into liposomes. If this approach can be translated to clinic patients, it will benefit millions of patients with diabetic wounds, pressure ulcers, and other types of acute and chronic wounds. If the full mechanism(s) is discovered by future research, it could have a major impact on medicine with great treatment potential in various human wounds. Despite thousands of remedies and dressings developed or advocated to treat chronic wounds, none has been proven effective.3 Dressing changes were made and digital photos were taken everyday. Dressing changes were made and digital photos were taken everyday. Dressing changes were made and digital photos were taken everyday. The other half of the tissue was submitted for transmission electron microscope processing, which was thinly sliced into 3-mm3 blocks for plastic embedding after postfixation in 2% osmium tetroxide and dehydration. The other half of the tissue was submitted for transmission electron microscope processing, which was thinly sliced into 3-mm3 blocks for plastic embedding after postfixation in 2% osmium tetroxide and dehydration. The other half of the tissue was submitted for transmission electron microscope processing, which was thinly sliced into 3-mm3 blocks for plastic embedding after postfixation in 2% osmium tetroxide and dehydration. The polymerized blocks were cut at 1-micron thickness, stained with toluidine blue for light microscopy and 800 Å thickness, and collected on copper grids, stained with lead citrate and urinal acetate, before they were examined in a CM10 Philips electron microscope (North American Philips, Co., Mahwah, NJ). Following assessment of the quality and distribution of the staining, a quantitative morphometry analysis was performed. In each microscopic field (a magnification of 400×), covering granular tissue either from the saline-treated group or from the ATP-vesicles–treated group in nonischemic wounds 6 days after surgery, the number of CD31-positive microvessels was counted as the total number of vessels per field. Among the 16 rabbits, 5 were killed at different time periods for tissue biopsy study before the wounds were healed, and the remaining 11 rabbits were followed until all wounds were healed. Wound-Healing TimesAmong the 11 rabbits, wound-healing time was compared between the ATP-vesicles and saline-treated wounds on the nonischemic ears and ischemic ears (22 wounds in each group). On the nonischemic ears the healing times were 14 to 17 days (mean 15.5 ± 1.0 days) for the saline-treated wounds and 13 to 16 days (mean 13.9 ± 1.5 days) for the ATP-vesicles treated wounds (P = 0.033). This granular tissue growth lagged behind about 2 to 3 days on the ischemic ears, but the wounds treated with ATP-vesicles also had faster granular tissue growth than those treated by saline (Fig. Six days after surgery, a higher number of inflammatory cells appeared in both superficial and deep areas of the granulation tissue in the ATP-vesicles–treated wounds (Fig. We have used a new intracellular ATP delivery technique in which highly fusogenic lipid vesicles (ATP-vesicles) are used to encapsulate magnesium-adenosine triphosphate (Mg-ATP). Scanning electron microscopy indicated numerous macrophages embedded in fibrin-like amorphous matrix. Scanning electron microscopy indicated numerous macrophages embedded in fibrin-like amorphous matrix. 