Tilting the head and body together (HBT) produced a bias in the point of subjective equality (PSE) such that in all subjects 10° upward pitch caused a neutral motion to be more likely to be perceived as forward relative to a 10° backward (Fig. In 10/11 subjects pitch up caused neutral motion to be more likely to be perceived as forward relative to the pitch down condition (Fig. Neurons in the vestibular nucleus neurons are influenced by static neck position in mice(Medrea and Cullen 2013) and a similar behavior has been shown in cats(Boyle and Pompeiano 1981; Anastasopoulos and Mergner 1982; Wilson et al  1990). But there was no significance of pitch (whether the tilt was up or down) within each condition(p=0.11, F[1,30]=2.6). Yet, in our day-to-day experience we experience head tilt without becoming disoriented. These findings are consistent with HOT not biasing how surge motion is perceived or changing the threshold of perception. Similar methods have also been used by others(Watson and Pelli 1983; MacNeilage et al  2010) and have potential advantages in terms of efficiency and stability over 1-up/2-down fixed step size methods(Kaernbach 1991), and have been argued to be ideal for PSE determination(Meese 1995). This avoids guessing, but also assumes no lapses and that the uncertain responses are centered about the PSE. Given what is known we felt that the method used to measure the PSE in these experiments is reasonable and accurate. This problem could be solved using temporal integration of the angular velocity signal that arises in the semicircular canals(Green and Angelaki 2003; Zhou et al  2006). Inactivation of the semicircular canals leads to erroneous eye movements in response to translation(Angelaki et al  1999) which supports this hypothesis. Studies which have shown an erroneous perception can be induced after prolonged rotations which activate the velocity storage mechanism which supports a role for the semicircular canals(Merfeld et al  1999; Merfeld et al  2001). Modeling of this type of data suggests that the tilt-translation ambiguity can be solved using canal and otolith signals alone(Zupan et al  2004). In fact conscious knowledge of the head tilt alone is not enough to resolve the tilt-translation ambiguity, because the 10° used in the HBT condition was well above threshold and during the HOT the subject tilted their own head. In the current paradigm if body proprioception was the deciding factor in fore-aft motion discrimination head orientation would not influence the perception, and this is to a large extent true. In the current paradigm if body proprioception was the deciding factor in fore-aft motion discrimination head orientation would not influence the perception, and this is to a large extent true. When proprioceptive signals indicate the head is upright relative to the body change in the gravity vector would be interpreted as translation. When proprioceptive signals indicate the head is upright relative to the body change in the gravity vector would be interpreted as translation. When proprioceptive signals indicate the head is upright relative to the body change in the gravity vector would be interpreted as translation. This is likely to be a reasonable assumption during most situations encountered during natural conditions, but as the current results demonstrate, is not sufficient to solve the tilt-translation ambiguity during situations in which the body is tilted. This is likely to be a reasonable assumption during most situations encountered during natural conditions, but as the current results demonstrate, is not sufficient to solve the tilt-translation ambiguity during situations in which the body is tilted. The current paper examines how tilt and translation are disambiguated by systematically varying the angle of the head relative to the body and measuring the point of subjective equality (PSE) between fore and aft translation. StimuliThe stimulus consisted of a 2s (0.5 Hz) sine wave in acceleration. A small amount of side-to-side mechanical oscillation was delivered to every stimulus as previously described(Crane 2012a) to create a small amount of noise and vibration to minimize non-vestibular cues. The wave was multiplied by the first cycle of a 0.25 Hz sine wave so that the intensity was largest near the peak velocity of the movement with a maximum amplitude of 0.6 mm. The wave was multiplied by the first cycle of a 0.25 Hz sine wave so that the intensity was largest near the peak velocity of the movement with a maximum amplitude of 0.6 mm. The wave was multiplied by the first cycle of a 0.25 Hz sine wave so that the intensity was largest near the peak velocity of the movement with a maximum amplitude of 0.6 mm. The order in which the trial blocks were presented was varied between subjects.Prior to each translation the head and platform tilt were oriented to the correct pitch angle (±10°) for the next trial. In the HBT and NT conditions no independent head positioning was required because the head was fixed to the platform and always remained in the same position relative to the body. The intended position was represented as a box centered on the intended position with the sides at ±1°. tilt) or linear acceleration due to translation(Graybiel et al  1979; Paige and Tomko 1991; Seidman et al  1998; Angelaki et al  2004; Zhou et al  2006; Green and Angelaki 2007; Angelaki and Cullen 2008; Osler and Reynolds 2012). 1).A staircase was used to determine which fore-aft translation stimuli to present next based on previous responses(Crane 2012a; Crane 2012b; Crane 2013). 1).A staircase was used to determine which fore-aft translation stimuli to present next based on previous responses(Crane 2012a; Crane 2012b; Crane 2013). They were told that each stimulus would consistent of either forward or backward motion and that their task was to identify the direction. The level of significance in the difference in two distributions as determined as previously described (Crane 2012a). The level of significance in the difference in two distributions as determined as previously described (Crane 2012a). This technique was effective for measuring the PSE (the mean of the cumulative distribution function also known as bias) and the threshold (sigma or width of the cumulative distribution function) for individual subjects. In the BOT condition the starting head position in pitch averaged 0.14° ± 0.13°, with the peak-to-peak pitch angle of 0.63 ± 0.26°. In the BOT condition the starting head position in pitch averaged 0.14° ± 0.13°, with the peak-to-peak pitch angle of 0.63 ± 0.26°. In the BOT condition the starting head position in pitch averaged 0.14° ± 0.13°, with the peak-to-peak pitch angle of 0.63 ± 0.26°. For the HOT condition the average starting head pitch error relative to ±10° was 0.10 ± 0.08° and the peak-to-peak head pitch during motion was 0.93 ±0.97°. For the HOT condition the average starting head pitch error relative to ±10° was 0.10 ± 0.08° and the peak-to-peak head pitch during motion was 0.93 ±0.97°. 