The intracellular loop (ICL) between transmembrane (TM) domains 3 and 4 of the γ2 subunit is required to anchor receptors to postsynaptic gephyrin scaffolds (Alldred et al , 2005; Christie et al , 2006). The intracellular loop (ICL) between transmembrane (TM) domains 3 and 4 of the γ2 subunit is required to anchor receptors to postsynaptic gephyrin scaffolds (Alldred et al , 2005; Christie et al , 2006). 2C, middle panel) as reported in other systems (Essrich et al , 1998; Crestani et al , 1999; Schweizer et al , 2003; Meier and Grantyn, 2004; Gillespie et al , 2005). ICL expression disrupts GABAergic synaptic transmissionWe examined whether inhibitory GABAergic synaptic transmission is affected by ICL expression. By contrast, the amplitude and IEI of spontaneous AMPAR - mediated miniature excitatory postsynaptic currents (mEPSCs) in ICL-expressing neurons were not significantly different from EGFP- or mICL- expressing cells (Fig. When we normalize the evoked GABAAR synaptic responses to the AMPAR responses, we find that ICL-expressing neurons have a significantly decreased ratio of GABAAR- to AMPAR-mediated currents compared to EGFP- or mICL-expressing neurons (Fig. This analysis demonstrates that ICL expression selectively decreases inhibitory input relative to glutamatergic excitatory input onto optic tectal neurons.Most GABAAR contain a binding site for benzodiazepines that is located at the interface of the γ2 and α subunits (Wallace et al , 2001; Sigel, 2002). The electrophysiology data and immunofluorescent staining data are consistent with the idea that ICL interferes with controlling γ2 subunit - containing GABAAR residence at postsynaptic sites. The electrophysiology data and immunofluorescent staining data are consistent with the idea that ICL interferes with controlling γ2 subunit - containing GABAAR residence at postsynaptic sites. The electrophysiology data and immunofluorescent staining data are consistent with the idea that ICL interferes with controlling γ2 subunit - containing GABAAR residence at postsynaptic sites. The electrophysiology data and immunofluorescent staining data are consistent with the idea that ICL interferes with controlling γ2 subunit - containing GABAAR residence at postsynaptic sites. Neuronal transfection and plasmid constructsAlbino Xenopus laevis tadpoles were reared from stage 23 at 16°C in a 12 hrs dark/12 hrs light cycle. Neuronal transfection and plasmid constructsAlbino Xenopus laevis tadpoles were reared from stage 23 at 16°C in a 12 hrs dark/12 hrs light cycle. Although control and ICL-expressing neurons have similar branch tip numbers on the first day of imaging, control neurons increase branch tip numbers at each daily interval over 3 days while ICL-expressing neurons have significantly fewer branch tips than controls at the 48 and 72 hr time points (Fig. Although control and ICL-expressing neurons have similar branch tip numbers on the first day of imaging, control neurons increase branch tip numbers at each daily interval over 3 days while ICL-expressing neurons have significantly fewer branch tips than controls at the 48 and 72 hr time points (Fig. The failure of ICL-expressing neurons to increase branch tip numbers over time might result from decreased rates of branch additions or increased rates of branch retractions. The failure of ICL-expressing neurons to increase branch tip numbers over time might result from decreased rates of branch additions or increased rates of branch retractions. Because distal dendrites are more dynamic than primary dendrites over the 2 hr imaging period (Cline, 2001; Hua and Smith, 2004), we focused our analysis on branch dynamics of secondary and higher order dendrites. Conversely, average branch tip number along the dendritic branches increased in control neurons but not in ICL-expressing neurons, so that control neurons increased their branch density over 2 hr, while ICL-expressing neurons significantly decreased their branch density (Fig. Using micropipettes with ∼ 1 µm tip diameter filled with plasmid (3 – 6 µg/µl DNA in ddH2O), we applied stimuli of 1 – 2 µA with 1 s trains of 1 ms square pulses at 200 Hz frequency. Experience - dependent dendritic growth requires GABAAR - dependent transmissionThe data presented above indicate that ICL-expressing neurons do not add branches at the same rates as in control neurons. In particular, a protocol in which tadpoles are exposed to a 4 hr period of darkness followed by a 4 hr period of enhanced visual stimulation increases rates of branch additions and TDBL (Sin et al , 2002; Haas et al , 2006). Settings used were: 5 exponential decay pulses with 1.6 ms duration with 50 V at 1 Hz (Haas et al , 2002).To determine the distribution of exogenously expressed ICL, we expressed the murine sequence of ICL (kindly provided by Dr. Simon Rumpel), which was cloned into a pEGFP-N1 backbone (Clontech, Mountain View, CA) to produce an EGFP-ICL fusion protein. Settings used were: 5 exponential decay pulses with 1.6 ms duration with 50 V at 1 Hz (Haas et al , 2002).To determine the distribution of exogenously expressed ICL, we expressed the murine sequence of ICL (kindly provided by Dr. Simon Rumpel), which was cloned into a pEGFP-N1 backbone (Clontech, Mountain View, CA) to produce an EGFP-ICL fusion protein. Settings used were: 5 exponential decay pulses with 1.6 ms duration with 50 V at 1 Hz (Haas et al , 2002).To determine the distribution of exogenously expressed ICL, we expressed the murine sequence of ICL (kindly provided by Dr. Simon Rumpel), which was cloned into a pEGFP-N1 backbone (Clontech, Mountain View, CA) to produce an EGFP-ICL fusion protein. Settings used were: 5 exponential decay pulses with 1.6 ms duration with 50 V at 1 Hz (Haas et al , 2002).To determine the distribution of exogenously expressed ICL, we expressed the murine sequence of ICL (kindly provided by Dr. Simon Rumpel), which was cloned into a pEGFP-N1 backbone (Clontech, Mountain View, CA) to produce an EGFP-ICL fusion protein. The dendritic distribution of EGFP-ICL in puncta apposed to VGAT positive puncta suggests that ICL accumulates at GABAergic postsynaptic sites, consistent with previous reports in cultured neurons (Essrich et al , 1998; Kittler et al , 2000; Meier and Grantyn, 2004) and in brain sections (Crestani et al , 1999; Schweizer et al , 2003). ICL-expressing tectal neurons do not show diazepam - mediated increases of GABAergic responses, consistent with the idea that residual synaptic GABAAR in ICL-expressing neurons lack the γ2 subunit, and that the remaining GABAergic synaptic transmission might be mediated by γ2 subunit - lacking receptors (Essrich et al , 1998), possibly γ3 subunit - containing receptors (Baer et al , 1999). GABAergic synaptic transmission is required for dendritic arbor growthUsing this tool, we probed the role of inhibitory GABAAR - dependent synaptic transmission on dendritic arbor development and structural plasticity, by visualizing the cell - autonomous effects of ICL expression in single tectal neurons in the intact X. laevis brain, at a developmental time when GABAergic transmission is inhibitory (Akerman and Cline, 2006). Analysis of branch dynamics from images collected at shorter interval indicates that decreased inhibitory GABAergic transmission decreases rates of dendritic branch additions. Inhibition is required for experience - dependent structural plasticityThe Xenopus retinotectal system demonstrates rapid experience - dependent structural plasticity that can be detected as in increase in the rate of dendritic arbor growth rate with a relatively brief exposure of 4 hrs to enhanced visual stimulation (Sin et al , 2002). ICL expression prevents the increase in total dendritic branch length and branch tip numbers that normally occur with 4 hr enhanced visual stimulation. Western BlotsStage 47 tadpole midbrains were dissected and homogenized in radioimmunoprecipitation assay (RIPA) buffer. Blots were blocked in 5% non-fat milk with 0.1% TBS and TritonX-100, (Sigma) and incubated with primary antibodies diluted in blocking solution. Blots were rinsed and either incubated with biotinylated anti-rabbit Ig (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ) with HRP-conjugated streptavidin (Amersham Biosciences) or directly with HRP-linked mouse IgG. Immunofluorescent staining and quantificationAnesthetized stage 47 tadpoles were dissected to remove the skin and meninges over the brain. Immunofluorescent staining and quantificationAnesthetized stage 47 tadpoles were dissected to remove the skin and meninges over the brain. Antibodies used were: rabbit polyclonal GABAAR γ2, rabbit polyclonal VGAT (Synaptic Systems, Germany), goat polyclonal GABAAR α2 (sc-7350, Santa Cruz, CA) and mouse monoclonal anti-GFP (Rockland, Gilbertsville, PA). Sections were rinsed and incubated in secondary antibodies (in 0.1% TritonX -100): Alexa Fluor 568/633 goat anti rabbit, Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-mouse/rabbit (Invitrogen, Eugene, OR). Confocal images were obtained sequentially with the two different laser excitations (to minimize bleed-through). Confocal images were obtained sequentially with the two different laser excitations (to minimize bleed-through). Brain sections selected for confocal imaging correspond to an approximate 100 µm depth from brain surface.To quantify the distribution of immunoreactivity, fluorescent intensity profiles were measured along dendrites and across somata with ImageJ (W. Rasband, NIH, Bethesda, MD). Receptor clusters were identified by intensity values two-folder larger than local diffusion fluorescence and with target size between 0.2–2 µm in diameter by Imaris (Saint Paul, MN) (Alldred et al , 2005). Custom software written in Matlab (Mathworks, Natick, MA) was used for colocalization and shift analyses. Fluorescent tectal neurons were imaged in vivo with a custom-built laser scanning two - photon microscope modified from a Olympus Fluoview FV300 confocal scanbox mounted on a Olympus BXSOW1 microscope (Ruthazer et al , 2006). Fluorescent tectal neurons were imaged in vivo with a custom-built laser scanning two - photon microscope modified from a Olympus Fluoview FV300 confocal scanbox mounted on a Olympus BXSOW1 microscope (Ruthazer et al , 2006). Average segment lengths (ASL) were determined by measuring distances between branch tips and branch points, the starting point is the first branch point of the primary dendrite. Areas were estimated using the angle and the maximal lengths to draw a polygon that includes the full dendritic tree. Areas were estimated using the angle and the maximal lengths to draw a polygon that includes the full dendritic tree. Areas were estimated using the angle and the maximal lengths to draw a polygon that includes the full dendritic tree. Areas were estimated using the angle and the maximal lengths to draw a polygon that includes the full dendritic tree. Recordings were accepted for analysis from cells in which the series resistance did not change over 10% and input resistance (0.7 – 2 GΩ) remained relatively constant. Five minute periods of mIPSC or mEPSC recordings were analyzed with the Synaptosoft Mini Analysis Program. Data are presented as individual data points or as mean ± s.e.m., unless otherwise noted. 1C, right panel) indicating the γ2 subunit is expressed in the midbrain of tadpole. 1D), consistent with observations in other vertebrate brain areas (Gutierrez et al , 1994; Essrich et al , 1998; Kittler et al , 2000; van Rijnsoever et al , 2005). 1D), consistent with observations in other vertebrate brain areas (Gutierrez et al , 1994; Essrich et al , 1998; Kittler et al , 2000; van Rijnsoever et al , 2005). 1D), consistent with observations in other vertebrate brain areas (Gutierrez et al , 1994; Essrich et al , 1998; Kittler et al , 2000; van Rijnsoever et al , 2005). These data indicate that the GABAAR γ2 subunit is present in the optic tectum of X. laevis. 