Overall, we present a new type of metagenomic data analysis that provides an accurate quantitative estimate of the growth dynamics of the microbiota from a single snapshot sample. We grew in vitro cultures of Escherichia coli (K-12 strain) and sequenced them at multiple time points during late lag phase, exponential phase, and early stationary phase (23). During stationary phase, when most of the cells in the culture are not growing and thus have a single copy of their genome, we found uniform coverage across the genome (Fig. This transformation was correlated with measured bacterial generation time (R=0.96, p<0.01; Fig S1B), confirming PTR as its proxy, even when the replication time is unknown. This transformation was correlated with measured bacterial generation time (R=0.96, p<0.01; Fig S1B), confirming PTR as its proxy, even when the replication time is unknown. This transformation was correlated with measured bacterial generation time (R=0.96, p<0.01; Fig S1B), confirming PTR as its proxy, even when the replication time is unknown. To examine whether PTRs can be used to detect clinically relevant changes in culture conditions, we treated an in vitro culture of early log-phase nalidixic acid-resistant Citrobacter rodentium with the bacteriostatic antibiotic erythromycin. To examine whether PTRs can be used to detect clinically relevant changes in culture conditions, we treated an in vitro culture of early log-phase nalidixic acid-resistant Citrobacter rodentium with the bacteriostatic antibiotic erythromycin. To examine whether PTRs can be used to detect clinically relevant changes in culture conditions, we treated an in vitro culture of early log-phase nalidixic acid-resistant Citrobacter rodentium with the bacteriostatic antibiotic erythromycin. To examine whether PTRs can be used to detect clinically relevant changes in culture conditions, we treated an in vitro culture of early log-phase nalidixic acid-resistant Citrobacter rodentium with the bacteriostatic antibiotic erythromycin. Here, we asked whether microbiota growth dynamics could be probed from a single metagenomic sample by examining the pattern of sequencing read coverage across bacterial genomes. Here, we asked whether microbiota growth dynamics could be probed from a single metagenomic sample by examining the pattern of sequencing read coverage across bacterial genomes. Here, we asked whether microbiota growth dynamics could be probed from a single metagenomic sample by examining the pattern of sequencing read coverage across bacterial genomes. Together, the in vitro experiments show that PTRs precede and predict changes in abundance even in the more complex setting of a mixed bacterial community, thereby establishing the link between PTRs and growth rate. To test whether PTRs remained accurate predictors of bacterial activity in a disease setting, we compared the proliferative behavior of a virulent and non-virulent (tir-mutant) strains of C. rodentium, which we used to infect C57BL/6 mice previously depleted of their native microbiota by wide-spectrum antibiotic treatment (23). the virulent strain displayed significantly higher counts (Mann-Whitney p<0.05, Fig. the virulent strain displayed significantly higher counts (Mann-Whitney p<0.05, Fig. the virulent strain displayed significantly higher counts (Mann-Whitney p<0.05, Fig. were even lower than those of in vitro cultures of C. rodentium in stationary phase (Mann-Whitney p<0.001; Fig. S8), and for 55 strains whose replication origin location is unknown our method generated novel predictions (Fig. S10B–D), indicating that host genetics may affect the growth dynamics of this bacterium. In both participants, we observed a global change in gut bacterial growth dynamics between dietary regimens, as reflected in statistically significant differences in the PTRs of all bacteria between the days in which rice was consumed and the days in which the participant's regular diet was followed (P<0.005 for each participant; Fig. Overall, these results provide examples of functional insights that are not achievable using traditional metagenomics analysis methods, and indicate that microbiome growth dynamics vary across diverse physiological conditions and locations. To test whether bacterial PTRs are associated with disease and different clinical parameters, we generated PTRs for every species in samples from European (N=396; 9) and Chinese (N=363; 7) cohorts. Notably, we found statistically significant associations between the PTRs of 20 different bacteria and multiple clinical parameters, including significant correlations between the PTR of Bifidobacterium longum and occurrence of Crohn's disease in the Spanish nationals of the European cohort (9; FDR-corrected Mann-Whitney p<0.005; Fig. 