Metabolic syndrome is a group of conditions that occur together, increasing risk of heart disease, stroke, insulin resistance, and type 2 diabetes. It is known for a quite long time that circulating PLTP levels are high in humans with obesity and insulin resistance(97–99). It is known for a quite long time that circulating PLTP levels are high in humans with obesity and insulin resistance(97–99). It is also known that PLTP-deficient mice have significantly lower VLDL production rate (51, 101) and liver PLTP expression with a PLTP-null background induces VLDL secretion and increases plasma triglyceride and non-HDL-cholesterol levels(14). It is also known that PLTP-deficient mice have significantly lower VLDL production rate (51, 101) and liver PLTP expression with a PLTP-null background induces VLDL secretion and increases plasma triglyceride and non-HDL-cholesterol levels(14). It is also known that PLTP-deficient mice have significantly lower VLDL production rate (51, 101) and liver PLTP expression with a PLTP-null background induces VLDL secretion and increases plasma triglyceride and non-HDL-cholesterol levels(14). However, a very recent study had a different view. It reported that systemic or brown adipose tissue-specific overexpression of PLTP, mediated by adenovirus or adenovirus associated virus, can control energy expenditure and systemic glucose/lipid homeostasis(103). It reported that systemic or brown adipose tissue-specific overexpression of PLTP, mediated by adenovirus or adenovirus associated virus, can control energy expenditure and systemic glucose/lipid homeostasis(103). This observation is associated with a reduction of phosphatidylserine externalization (104). However, other studies (most of them are related with lipopolysaccharide treatment) showed that PLTP has an anti-inflammatory function (111–113). However, other studies (most of them are related with lipopolysaccharide treatment) showed that PLTP has an anti-inflammatory function (111–113). However, other studies (most of them are related with lipopolysaccharide treatment) showed that PLTP has an anti-inflammatory function (111–113). Since PLTP can bind and neutralize LPS, this can potentially explain its anti-inflammatory functions (111, 114). Since PLTP can bind and neutralize LPS, this can potentially explain its anti-inflammatory functions (111, 114). There are two forms, low active one and high active one, of PLTP in human plasma, the former is complexed with apoA-I and the latter is complexed with apoE (11–13). There are two forms, low active one and high active one, of PLTP in human plasma, the former is complexed with apoA-I and the latter is complexed with apoE (11–13). We are currently preparing this mouse model and hopefully, in the near future, we should be able to investigate the impact of inducible PLTP deficiency in atherogenesis. We are currently preparing this mouse model and hopefully, in the near future, we should be able to investigate the impact of inducible PLTP deficiency in atherogenesis. Phospholipid transfer protein (PLTP) belongs to a family of lipid transfer proteins (1). In the lung, the expression level of PLTP in mice is very high. In the lung, the expression level of PLTP in mice is very high. In multiple sclerosis, while plasma PLTP activity is significantly increased, cerebrospinal fluid PLTP activity is significantly decreased (19, 20), suggesting that PLTP-related metabolism may be involved in multiple sclerosis. In multiple sclerosis, while plasma PLTP activity is significantly increased, cerebrospinal fluid PLTP activity is significantly decreased (19, 20), suggesting that PLTP-related metabolism may be involved in multiple sclerosis. Many physiological factors and pathological stimuli can also regulate the expression of PLTP activity. In general, each of these transfer proteins have a boomerang shape, with the N-terminal and C-terminal barrel structures linked together to form a hydrophobic channel for the transport of lipid molecules. Many human studies agreed with our observation (37–40). In mouse models, global PLTP deficiency attenuates the development of atherosclerosis (51), whereas PLTP overexpression has an opposite effect (52–54). Human Pltp transgenic rabbits have a significant increase in plasma LDL (66) which could be related with more VLDL production. It is well known that hepatocytes, enterocytes, and peripheral tissue cells (such macrophages) make contribution to HDL formation through ABCA1 (68, 72). It is well known that hepatocytes, enterocytes, and peripheral tissue cells (such macrophages) make contribution to HDL formation through ABCA1 (68, 72). Since PLTP can help ABCA1 to efflux lipids (73), PLTP activity should have an impact in HDL production in these three type cells (Figure 1). Researches have indicated that HDL particles are very heterogeneous, and indeed increasing total HDL cholesterol does not reduce cardiovascular risk (81–86). Researches have indicated that HDL particles are very heterogeneous, and indeed increasing total HDL cholesterol does not reduce cardiovascular risk (81–86). Thus, it is important to characterize each HDL particle subclass in terms of its pro- or anti-atherogenicity. We also found that liver-specific PLTP deficiency significantly decreases HDL and apoA-I levels (65). However, systemic apoM deficiency in mice can only decrease plasma S1P levels by 25-45% (93, 94). However, systemic apoM deficiency in mice can only decrease plasma S1P levels by 25-45% (93, 94). However, systemic apoM deficiency in mice can only decrease plasma S1P levels by 25-45% (93, 94). 