The data showed that a higher number of A2780-GFP cells adhered to J-cell monolayer than to L-cell monolayer at 15 min and 45 min after coculture (Fig. The data showed that a higher number of A2780-GFP cells adhered to J-cell monolayer than to L-cell monolayer at 15 min and 45 min after coculture (Fig. The data showed that a higher number of A2780-GFP cells adhered to J-cell monolayer than to L-cell monolayer at 15 min and 45 min after coculture (Fig. Five Notch ligands including Jagged-1, Jagged-2, Delta-like-1 (DLL1), Delta-like-3 (DLL3) and Delta-like-4 (DLL4) have been reported in mammals. The coculture was first treated with a crosslinking reagent, disuccinimidyl glutarate (DSG), before immunoprecipitation. Therefore, expression of Notch ligands in mesothelial cells derived from benign effusions or purified from tumor tissues was analyzed. NICD then translocates to the nucleus where it binds to the transcription factor CSL complex, and converts CSL into a transcriptional activator that promotes the transcription of genes downstream in the Notch pathway (4). The data demonstrated that Hes5 and Pbx1 promoter activities in A2780 cell were significantly induced by co-culturing with J cells but not with L cells. In contrast, we did not detect luciferase activity from Hes1 promoter reporter or vector control plasmid in any of the experimental conditions. 5C) and colony formation assay (Fig. The effects of Jagged-1 are mediated by the Notch3 signaling pathwayTo determine if the observed biological effects of Jagged-1 involved the Notch3 signaling pathway, we applied two independent but complementary approaches. The effects of Jagged-1 are mediated by the Notch3 signaling pathwayTo determine if the observed biological effects of Jagged-1 involved the Notch3 signaling pathway, we applied two independent but complementary approaches. The effects of Jagged-1 are mediated by the Notch3 signaling pathwayTo determine if the observed biological effects of Jagged-1 involved the Notch3 signaling pathway, we applied two independent but complementary approaches. The effects of Jagged-1 are mediated by the Notch3 signaling pathwayTo determine if the observed biological effects of Jagged-1 involved the Notch3 signaling pathway, we applied two independent but complementary approaches. The effects of Jagged-1 are mediated by the Notch3 signaling pathwayTo determine if the observed biological effects of Jagged-1 involved the Notch3 signaling pathway, we applied two independent but complementary approaches. First, we asked if constitutive expression of the NICD could reverse the growth inhibitory effect of Jagged-1 shRNA. Second, a Jagged-1 peptide known to activate Notch signaling comparably to full-length Jagged-1 was employed. Second, a Jagged-1 peptide known to activate Notch signaling comparably to full-length Jagged-1 was employed. S6, the results demonstrated that Notch3 siRNA did not significantly affect Jagged-1 mRNA expression, suggesting a lack of such feedback loop in ovarian cancer cells. This suggests that in ovarian carcinoma Jagged-1 interacted with Notch3 in juxtacrine fashion. This suggests that in ovarian carcinoma Jagged-1 interacted with Notch3 in juxtacrine fashion. First, Jagged-1 was co-expressed with Notch3 in a significant number of ovarian cancers. In aggregate, these findings suggest that Jagged-1 and Notch3 form a functional signaling network. We then characterized the functional role of Jagged-1 and Notch3 interaction in promoting cellular binding and proliferation. For example, Jagged-1 may have its own signaling function that is independent of the canonical Notch pathway. For example, Jagged-1 may have its own signaling function that is independent of the canonical Notch pathway. For example, Jagged-1 may have its own signaling function that is independent of the canonical Notch pathway. For example, Jagged-1 may have its own signaling function that is independent of the canonical Notch pathway. For example, Jagged-1 may have its own signaling function that is independent of the canonical Notch pathway. The soluble Jagged-1 intracellular fragment translocates into the nucleus and activates gene expression via the transcription factor AP1 (15). The soluble Jagged-1 intracellular fragment translocates into the nucleus and activates gene expression via the transcription factor AP1 (15). Parental L cell and J cells stably expressing the hemagglutinin (HA)-tagged Jagged-1 protein were generously provided by Dr. G Weinmaster (Department of Biological Chemistry, UCLA). The mesothelial cells used in this study were found to be positive for calretinin (a mesothelial cell marker) in more than 99% of cells and negative for Ber-EP4 and mucin 4 (carcinoma markers) as determined by immunocytochemistry. The mesothelial cells used in this study were found to be positive for calretinin (a mesothelial cell marker) in more than 99% of cells and negative for Ber-EP4 and mucin 4 (carcinoma markers) as determined by immunocytochemistry. The mesothelial cells used in this study were found to be positive for calretinin (a mesothelial cell marker) in more than 99% of cells and negative for Ber-EP4 and mucin 4 (carcinoma markers) as determined by immunocytochemistry. The mesothelial cells used in this study were found to be positive for calretinin (a mesothelial cell marker) in more than 99% of cells and negative for Ber-EP4 and mucin 4 (carcinoma markers) as determined by immunocytochemistry. They also exhibit high levels of chromosomal instability as reflected by frequent changes in DNA copy number including allelic loss and gain involving almost all chromosomes (1-2). Data was further normalized to the result obtained from ovarian surface epithelial cell, OSE7. Gene knockdown using siRNA and shRNAJagged-1 small hairpin RNA (shRNA) vectors were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Cells were transfected with siRNA or shRNA at a final concentration of 200 nM or 2 μg, respectively, using lipofectamine method (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). On the following day, the treated cells were harvested and used for cell growth, binding and coculture assays. On the following day, the treated cells were harvested and used for cell growth, binding and coculture assays. On the following day, the treated cells were harvested and used for cell growth, binding and coculture assays. Packaging cells (Phoenix cells) were transiently transfected with the NICD3 or empty vector using lipofectamine method (Invitrogen). Packaging cells (Phoenix cells) were transiently transfected with the NICD3 or empty vector using lipofectamine method (Invitrogen). Packaging cells (Phoenix cells) were transiently transfected with the NICD3 or empty vector using lipofectamine method (Invitrogen). Immunointensity for Jagged-1 was scored as negative/low and high; nuclear staining for Notch3 was scored as negative (-) and positive (+) by two investigators. Cell growth and colony formation assaysCells were grown in 96-well plates at a density of 3,000 per well. A2780 cells (1.0×105) expressing green fluorescence protein (A2780-GFP) were laid on top of the feeder cells. Fifteen or forty-five minutes after coculture, A2780-GFP cells which did not anchor to the bottom layer were harvested and classified as non-adherent cells. The A2780-GFP cells adhering to the bottom monolayer cells were dissociated by PBS containing 2 mM EGTA and determined as adherent cells. The A2780-GFP cells adhering to the bottom monolayer cells were dissociated by PBS containing 2 mM EGTA and determined as adherent cells. The A2780-GFP cells adhering to the bottom monolayer cells were dissociated by PBS containing 2 mM EGTA and determined as adherent cells. The A2780-GFP cells adhering to the bottom monolayer cells were dissociated by PBS containing 2 mM EGTA and determined as adherent cells. OVCAR3 cells were irradiated for 30 minutes with 68 cGy/min while L cell, J cell, and mesothelial cells were irradiated at the same intensity for 8 minutes. OVCAR3 cells were irradiated for 30 minutes with 68 cGy/min while L cell, J cell, and mesothelial cells were irradiated at the same intensity for 8 minutes. OVCAR3 cells were irradiated for 30 minutes with 68 cGy/min while L cell, J cell, and mesothelial cells were irradiated at the same intensity for 8 minutes. Disuccinimidyl glutarate (DSG), a crosslinking reagent, was added to the culture at a final concentration of 20 μM and incubated for 30 min. Promoter reporter constructs and pRL-Renilla control plasmid (Promega) were transiently transfected into OVCAR3 cells by lipofectamine (Invitrogen). Promoter reporter constructs and pRL-Renilla control plasmid (Promega) were transiently transfected into OVCAR3 cells by lipofectamine (Invitrogen). Promoter reporter constructs and pRL-Renilla control plasmid (Promega) were transiently transfected into OVCAR3 cells by lipofectamine (Invitrogen). Luciferase activity was determined by the Dual-Glo luciferase reagent (Promega). The reporter luciferase was normalized to Renilla luciferase and the ratio of luminescence from the experimental reporter to luminescence from the control reporter was calculated. The specificity of the Jagged-1 antibody was demonstrated by Western blot analysis. The Notch3 antibody used for immunohistochemistry has been previously reported (3) and its specificity was further validated by Western blot. 