As part of this function, XBP1 may also contribute to the previously described rapid induction of sugarbabe by dietary sugars (Mattila et al , 2015; Zinke et al , 2002). In addition to the regulation of XBP1 and Sugarbabe, IRE1 may also influence lipogenesis by regulating the transcripts of several lipid metabolism genes via a mechanism called RIDD (Regulated IRE1-Dependent Decay) (Coelho et al , 2013; Hollien and Weissman, 2006). This observation contrasts with the DR-specific requirement for IRE1 for survival, and may be explained by the fact that under AL, the high dietary protein drives increased protein production (increasing ER stress) when compared to DR (Tatar et al , 2014). A UPR-independent function for both IRE1 and XBP1 has previously been proposed in the context of development (Shen et al , 2005). The activation of IRE1/XBP1 in the absence of acute ER stress is likely mediated by changes in cellular lipid content, known to allow IRE1 dimerization independently of the UPR (Volmer and Ron, 2015; Volmer et al , 2013). A recent study of the role of IRE1alpha in the intestine of mice showed that depletion of IRE1 in EC generated mice with impaired intestinal epithelial barrier function and that were short lived (Zhang et al , 2015). Our data suggest that such deleterious effects of IRE1 deficiency on epithelial homeostasis are preceded by changes in the homeostatic metabolism of ECs. Based on the evolutionary conservation of intestinal morphology and function, as well as of the signaling molecules involved, it can be anticipated that the IRE1/XBP1/Sugarbabe-mediated metabolic adaptation of the intestinal epithelium is conserved in vertebrates and may be part of the metabolic adaptation required for DR-induced lifespan extension. Details in Sup Materials.Starvation AssaysFlies were maintained as for a longevity survival assay. Details in Sup Materials.Starvation AssaysFlies were maintained as for a longevity survival assay. 12 replicates of 4-5 flies each, from 3 independent matting bottles per condition were used. Heads were removed to avoid interference of the red eye pigment with the signal produced.Oil Red O (ORO) staining: guts were dissected in PBS, fixed in 4% PFA/PBS for 20 min and incubated in fresh Oil Red O for 30 min. In situ HybridizationProtocol was adapted from (Zinke et al , 2002) using Digoxigenin (DIG) labeled RNA probes detected by NBT/BCIP assay (DIG nucleic acid detection kit, Roche). Primers used to generate RNA probes for sugarbabe: 5´-ccc acc aca gac aac aaa c-3´ and 5´-gtt cag att cga tgg atg c-3´Statistical AnalysisSurvival assays were analyzed with GraphPad Prism (v.5.0). IRE1 is also required for S6K and HIF-1 mediated lifespan extension under DR in C elegans, though the mechanisms mediating this effect remain unclear (Chen et al , 2009). Dietary Restriction (DR), defined as a regime of limited protein intake without malnutrition, leads to increased lifespan and healthspan in all tested model organisms (Fontana and Partridge, 2015; Kapahi et al , 2010). To regulate lipogenesis, XBP1 controls target genes that are functionally distinct from its canonical ER stress-related targets, and are regulated by distinct sequence motifs (Acosta-Alvear et al , 2007; Sha et al , 2009). Moreover, we identify the transcription factor Sugarbabe as a downstream target of the IRE1/XBP1 module that is required for increased lipid turnover under DR. Our results provide insights into physiological mechanisms that link tissue-specific metabolic adaptation to lifespan extension under DR conditions. We confirmed efficient IRE1 down-regulation in dissected guts by qPCR using two EC drivers 5966GS-GAL4 and NP1-GAL4 (Fig S1G, H). To determine if IRE1 depletion in ECs affects overall gut integrity, we monitored intestinal stem cell (ISC) activity, which increases with age and in response to gut damage, as well as overall EC morphology. To determine if IRE1 depletion in ECs affects overall gut integrity, we monitored intestinal stem cell (ISC) activity, which increases with age and in response to gut damage, as well as overall EC morphology. To determine if IRE1 depletion in ECs affects overall gut integrity, we monitored intestinal stem cell (ISC) activity, which increases with age and in response to gut damage, as well as overall EC morphology. To determine if IRE1 depletion in ECs affects overall gut integrity, we monitored intestinal stem cell (ISC) activity, which increases with age and in response to gut damage, as well as overall EC morphology. Although the carbohydrate amount in the experimental food is the same in both diets (5% sucrose and 8% cornmeal), the lower protein content in our model of DR (0.5% DR vs 5% AL) leads to enhanced triglyceride synthesis (Katewa et al , 2012). To assess these possibilities we examined the dynamic changes in TGs after feeding radiolabeled glucose for a 36h period as described previously (Katewa et al , 2012). Increased lipid turnover upon caloric restriction and increased adiposity upon protein restriction (which correlate with increased lifespan) has also been described in mice (Bruss et al , 2010). Increased lipid turnover upon caloric restriction and increased adiposity upon protein restriction (which correlate with increased lifespan) has also been described in mice (Bruss et al , 2010). Indeed, after control flies, already under starvation for 10h and 30h, are placed for a short period (8-10h) on sucrose-only agar food (represented by vertical green dashed lines on Fig S1F) they can increase their starvation resistance and survive longer than their constantly starved siblings (solid green line versus solid red line). Indeed, after control flies, already under starvation for 10h and 30h, are placed for a short period (8-10h) on sucrose-only agar food (represented by vertical green dashed lines on Fig S1F) they can increase their starvation resistance and survive longer than their constantly starved siblings (solid green line versus solid red line). We used an XBP1 reporter line (Ryoo et al , 2013) to assess tissue-specific activation of the ER stress response mediated by IRE1. Surprisingly, the XBP1-DsRed signal was much higher in the guts of flies fed on AL and this activation was dependent on IRE1 (Fig S3F and S3G). Supporting a complex role for IRE1/XBP1 signaling in intestinal homeostasis, overexpression of either IRE1 or spliced XBP1 in ECs is not sufficient to increase lifespan, but slightly reduces lifespan (Fig S3H and S3I). Importantly, Drosophila provides critical technical advantages that allow characterizing tissue-tissue coordination during metabolic adaptation (Chatterjee et al , 2014; Katewa et al , 2012; Leopold and Perrimon, 2007). It has previously been suggested that such a repression is an initial step before conversion of dietary sugars into lipids (Zinke et al , 2002). Its expression is strongly repressed in melt mutants, which have almost 50% less fat stores than normal (Teleman et al , 2005). Several studies have linked IRE1 and XBP1, proteins predominantly associated with the ER stress pathway, with increased lipogenesis and lipid usage (Acosta-Alvear et al , 2007; Lee et al , 2008; Shao et al , 2014). Several studies have linked IRE1 and XBP1, proteins predominantly associated with the ER stress pathway, with increased lipogenesis and lipid usage (Acosta-Alvear et al , 2007; Lee et al , 2008; Shao et al , 2014). 