This database uses diagnosis and procedural codes from the International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical Modification (ICD-9-CM), and was built as part of the Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project (HCUP) under the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ). Owing to lack of specificity with some ICD-9-CM procedure codes, we optimized case capture by using ICD-9-CM codes for tendon and muscle repairs, as well as reattachment of fingers and thumb. Our procedure and diagnosis code list was reviewed and verified for completeness by our University billing and coding specialists. Statistical AnalysisWe used a two-step analysis to evaluate longitudinal (quarter to quarter) changes in proportion of replantation surgeries provided to Medicaid beneficiaries and the uninsured. Some hand surgeons do not provide replantation care owing to limitations in their practice model or case volume and experience.8 Many others do not provide this care because of financial and hospital system constraints.8, 9 Although regionalization of replantation care has been proposed as an approach to combat some of these limitations in provider access4, 10, issues of inadequate compensation – often caused by a lack of insurance coverage in the finger amputation patient population – must also be addressed. Predictor variables included a dichotomous pre-post intervention variable and a continuous variable representing each quarter of the study.We then calculated the abrupt change in percent Medicaid and percent uninsured receiving replantation right after expansion to see if there was an immediate effect of the policy change. the slope, to follow the change over time, and also calculated the absolute effect of the expansion at the end of the study period.21Lastly, based on NY demographic data 22 we also calculated population-adjusted numbers of patients treated in each quarter across the study period to evaluate the absolute number of Medicaid and uninsured patients who received the replantation surgeries. Prior to expansion there was a declining trend in the probability of treated patients being Medicaid beneficiaries (p=0.06, −0.37% per quarter [95% CI −0.76, 0.02]), although this result did not reach statistical significance. When compared to the expected proportion from a predicted trajectory had there been no Medicaid expansion, the proportion of Medicaid beneficiaries that actually received replantation procedures was 1.7% greater [95% CI 1.35, 2.05] within the first 5 years post-expansion (Figure 1). Using the population-based analysis, we identified that this trend change resulted in a decrease of 0.15 cases/1,000,000 population per quarter – from a predicted 0.25 cases/1,000,000 down to an actual 0.10 cases/1,000,000 (Figure 4). Medicaid beneficiaries comprised a significantly greater proportion of the patients receiving replantation procedures after expansion of Medicaid coverage in NY in 2001. Hence it is pertinent to evaluate how changes in this government-sponsored health care coverage influences utilization of services pertinent to working-age patients, including management of traumatic hand injuries. Considering that replantation care is more often provided at tertiary referral centers and academic centers, the financial burden of the uninsured is disproportionately placed on these institutions.4, 11 This is especially true of emergent hand surgery transfers, as patients without insurance or on Medicaid are transferred significantly more frequently to urban academic centers than those with private insurance coverage.35 Although Medicaid reimbursement is often lower than that of private payers, when compared to the financial challenges of caring for the uninsured with complex hand trauma, the profit margin benefit of Medicaid coverage to the hand surgeon and the institution is substantial.36 As with any retrospective database study, our analysis and results are dependent on accuracy of data capture. As with any retrospective database study, our analysis and results are dependent on accuracy of data capture. As with any retrospective database study, our analysis and results are dependent on accuracy of data capture. We also cannot determine whether the change in trend of uninsured care was due to direct transition of these patients on to Medicaid or if these were separate groups of patients, although this would not detract from the overall benefit of increased care delivery to the medically underserved. To see the effect of policy change on care delivery and cost coverage is critical to understanding ongoing policy changes, as well as predicting how these systems will continue to evolve. To see the effect of policy change on care delivery and cost coverage is critical to understanding ongoing policy changes, as well as predicting how these systems will continue to evolve. 