The SCG were markedly smaller in Egr3−/− mice compared to wild type littermates (Fig. The SCG were markedly smaller in Egr3−/− mice compared to wild type littermates (Fig. 2D, black arrowhead) and caudal paravertebral ganglia (Fig. 2D, black arrowhead) and caudal paravertebral ganglia (Fig. However, significantly increased apoptosis was found in newborn Egr3−/− SCG (Fig. In addition, BrdU incorporation studies showed no difference in cell proliferation between newborn wild type and Egr3−/− SCG that could have otherwise contributed to differences in the number of sympathetic neurons in postnatal mice (Fig. Thus, similar to neurotrophin- and neurotrophin signaling-deficient mice, sympathetic neuron death in Egr3−/− mice occurs by apoptosis at a developmental time point that coincides with active target tissue innervation and acquisition of NGF dependence.Embryonic and early postnatal sympathetic neurons depend upon NGF for their survival in vitro and in vivo, and >90% of them can be rescued from apoptosis in vitro when 10 ng/mL of NGF is present in the culture medium (Belliveau et al , 1997). To examine whether Egr3−/−sympathetic neurons have an autonomous defect in survival, wild type and Egr3−/− SCG were isolated at E18.5, prior to the onset of increased apoptosis that occurs in Egr3−/− mice in vivo, and sympathetic neurons were dissociated into culture media containing differing amounts of NGF. By contrast, innervation to the trachea of Egr3−/−:DτlZ+ mice was generally decreased but remaining axons also failed to branch efficiently to form a comparatively elaborate sympathetic plexus. 4D′, black arrowhead), they failed to normally branch and invade the splenic parenchyma (Fig. 4D′, arrow) compared to wild type (Fig. Compared to wild type (Fig. However, considering that Egr3 and Egr4, two closely related transcriptional regulators, have been shown to functionally cooperate with Egr1 to regulate some target genes such as luteinizing hormone β-peptide (LHβ), the neuroplasticity associated protein Arc, and the low-affinity neurotrophin receptor p75NTR (Gao et al , 2007; Li et al , 2005; Tourtellotte et al , 2000), it seemed plausible that other Egr proteins may have important roles in sympathetic neuron differentiation in vivo. To examine whether sympathetic denervation was also associated with deregulation of AANAT expression during the light-dark cycle, wild type and Egr3−/− mice were entrained to a 10D:14L light-dark cycle (see methods). To examine whether sympathetic denervation was also associated with deregulation of AANAT expression during the light-dark cycle, wild type and Egr3−/− mice were entrained to a 10D:14L light-dark cycle (see methods). To examine whether sympathetic denervation was also associated with deregulation of AANAT expression during the light-dark cycle, wild type and Egr3−/− mice were entrained to a 10D:14L light-dark cycle (see methods). Pineal glands were dissected for qPCR analysis at three time points during the 24 hour photo period: ZT13, ZT21 and ZT9, with ZT0 defined as the temporal onset of the dark-light transition. By contrast, in Egr3−/− pineal glands AANAT induction reached less than 20% of the maximal wild type induction (ZT21) after the onset of the dark phase before returning to baseline during the light phase of the cycle (Fig. Sympathetic axon terminals release norepinephrine to activate myocardiocyte β1 adrenergic receptors and increase heart rate and contractility (Costanzo, 1998). Sympathetic axon terminals release norepinephrine to activate myocardiocyte β1 adrenergic receptors and increase heart rate and contractility (Costanzo, 1998). In hearts from Egr3+/+:DτlZ+ mice, prominent epicardial innervation to the right atrium (Fig. In hearts from Egr3+/+:DτlZ+ mice, prominent epicardial innervation to the right atrium (Fig. The ventricular epicardial axons formed highly branched networks of small axons that diffusely innervated the myocardium (Fig. The ventricular epicardial axons formed highly branched networks of small axons that diffusely innervated the myocardium (Fig. To determine whether these abnormalities have physiologic significance, heart rate and myocardial contractility were measured in cardiac catheterized adult wild type and Egr3−/− mice. Egr3 is a member of the early growth response family of zinc finger transcriptional regulators which consists of four structurally similar proteins (Egr1–4). Egr3 is a member of the early growth response family of zinc finger transcriptional regulators which consists of four structurally similar proteins (Egr1–4). The closely related protein, Egr1 was considered to be a potential mediator of differentiation related gene transcription (Milbrandt, 1987). Although the quantitative and in vitro studies were focused on SCG neurons, a detailed analysis of Egr3−/− mice demonstrated widespread atrophy of sympathetic chain ganglia and target tissue innervation defects, indicating a global role for Egr3 in SNS development. However, unlike mice lacking NGF or its receptor TrkA, which lose most sympathetic neurons by birth (Crowley et al , 1994; Smeyne et al , 1994), we found that only about 1/3 of SCG neurons were lost in Egr3-deficient mice after birth, despite the fact that it is expressed in most, if not all, SCG neurons. Sympathetic neuron death may occur later in Egr3-deficient mice because abnormal terminal axon extension and branching within target tissues, which occurs relatively late during SNS development, would be expected to lead to relatively delayed defects in NGF acquisition. Although Egr3 does not appear to have a direct role in sympathetic neuron survival like NGF, it does appear to have a similar role in sympathetic terminal axon extension and branching within target tissues. Tissues were either processed for paraffin embedding or cryoprotected overnight in graded (15–30%) phosphate-buffered sucrose and embedded in OCT. Serial paraffin tissue sections (16 μm) or frozen sections (12–16 μm) were analyzed. Serial paraffin tissue sections (16 μm) or frozen sections (12–16 μm) were analyzed. Serial paraffin tissue sections (16 μm) or frozen sections (12–16 μm) were analyzed. Serial paraffin tissue sections (16 μm) or frozen sections (12–16 μm) were analyzed. Serial paraffin tissue sections (16 μm) or frozen sections (12–16 μm) were analyzed. Serial paraffin tissue sections (16 μm) or frozen sections (12–16 μm) were analyzed. Species appropriate Alexa488-conjugated (Invitrogen) or Cy3-conjugated (Jackson Immunoresearch) secondary antibodies were used to visualize the proteins. Species appropriate Alexa488-conjugated (Invitrogen) or Cy3-conjugated (Jackson Immunoresearch) secondary antibodies were used to visualize the proteins. Western blotting was performed as described in detail (Li et al , 2005) using the following antibodies: anti-Egr3 (sc-191), anti-ERK1/2 (sc-94), anti-phosphorylated ERK1/2 (sc-16982) and anti-actin (sc-1616) (all from Santa Cruz Biotechnology). Western blotting was performed as described in detail (Li et al , 2005) using the following antibodies: anti-Egr3 (sc-191), anti-ERK1/2 (sc-94), anti-phosphorylated ERK1/2 (sc-16982) and anti-actin (sc-1616) (all from Santa Cruz Biotechnology). The antibodies were detected using species appropriate horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies (Jackson ImmunoResearch) and SuperSignal West Pico chemiluminescent substrate (Pierce). The antibodies were detected using species appropriate horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies (Jackson ImmunoResearch) and SuperSignal West Pico chemiluminescent substrate (Pierce). The antibodies were detected using species appropriate horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies (Jackson ImmunoResearch) and SuperSignal West Pico chemiluminescent substrate (Pierce). The antibodies were detected using species appropriate horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies (Jackson ImmunoResearch) and SuperSignal West Pico chemiluminescent substrate (Pierce). For example, migration of sympathoadrenal precursors from the neural crest is dependent upon signaling through ErbB2, ErbB3 (Britsch et al , 1998) and Ret (Enomoto et al , 2001) tyrosine kinase receptors as well as guidance molecules such as Semaphorin3a (Kawasaki et al , 2002). For example, migration of sympathoadrenal precursors from the neural crest is dependent upon signaling through ErbB2, ErbB3 (Britsch et al , 1998) and Ret (Enomoto et al , 2001) tyrosine kinase receptors as well as guidance molecules such as Semaphorin3a (Kawasaki et al , 2002). Reverse transcription and qPCR was performed as previously described in detail (Albert et al , 2005). Reverse transcription and qPCR was performed as previously described in detail (Albert et al , 2005). AANAT expression analysis and light cyclingAdult wild type and Egr3−/− mice were housed in a controlled lighting environment (10 hours of dark, 14 hours of light [10D:14L]) for at least three weeks prior to analysis. AANAT expression analysis and light cyclingAdult wild type and Egr3−/− mice were housed in a controlled lighting environment (10 hours of dark, 14 hours of light [10D:14L]) for at least three weeks prior to analysis. AANAT expression analysis and light cyclingAdult wild type and Egr3−/− mice were housed in a controlled lighting environment (10 hours of dark, 14 hours of light [10D:14L]) for at least three weeks prior to analysis. In addition, specification of the noradrenergic phenotype of post-migratory sympathoadrenal precursors depends upon diffusible factors such as bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) and transcriptional regulators such as Mash1, Phox2a and b, dHand and GATA3 (for review see, (Goridis and Rohrer, 2002; Howard, 2005)). In addition, specification of the noradrenergic phenotype of post-migratory sympathoadrenal precursors depends upon diffusible factors such as bone morphogenetic proteins (BMPs) and transcriptional regulators such as Mash1, Phox2a and b, dHand and GATA3 (for review see, (Goridis and Rohrer, 2002; Howard, 2005)). Cardiac physiologyMale and female adult wild type and Egr3−/− mice, weighing 18–23g, were used. Heart rate and myocardial contractility (change in pressure over time; dP/dt) measurements were compared before and after injection of the α2-adrenoreceptor antagonist, Yohimbine (YOH; 2 mg/kg, i.v.). Egr3 is regulated during development and by NGF signaling in sympathetic neuronsPrevious reports indicate that Egr1 may have a role in NGF-mediated sympathetic neuron differentiation, but the results were not confirmed in Egr1-deficient mice. Moreover, Egr3 induction was dependent upon MAPK signaling since pretreatment with the MEK inhibitor U0126 abrogated NGF-dependent Egr3 induction (Fig. Unlike neurotrophin signaling-deficient mice in which most sympathetic neuron loss occurs during late embryonic development, no significant neuron loss was observed in Egr3−/− mice until one day after birth (P1; Fig. Moreover, consistent with previously published observations, the total number of SCG neurons decreased with age in both wild type and Egr3−/− mice (Gatzinsky et al , 2004; Jansen et al , 2007). 