Participants and parents/caregivers respond on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from “False” to “True.” Example items include “I say the first thing that comes to my mind without thinking enough about it,” “I should try harder to control myself when I’m having fun,” and “I become “wild and crazy” and do things other people might not like.” Reliability estimates range from α = .78 to 0.81. Given our cohorts were naturally occurring (e.g., age) we expected cohort differences to emerge as cohort 1 (14 year olds) are likely different in terms of binge drinking compared to, say, cohort 4 (17 year olds). To adjust for these cohort differences we used propensity weighting (Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983) procedures to adjust for differences across our cohorts. More recently, procedures that use propensity weighting have been proposed to adjust for potential differences across groups. More recently, procedures that use propensity weighting have been proposed to adjust for potential differences across groups. More recently, procedures that use propensity weighting have been proposed to adjust for potential differences across groups. More recently, procedures that use propensity weighting have been proposed to adjust for potential differences across groups. In an early meta-analysis, Pratt and Cullen (2000) provided evidence for Gottredson and Hirschi’s general theory of crime and the association between diminished self-control and criminal behavior (r = .23) and analogous behavior (e.g., drug and alcohol use; r = .35). In an early meta-analysis, Pratt and Cullen (2000) provided evidence for Gottredson and Hirschi’s general theory of crime and the association between diminished self-control and criminal behavior (r = .23) and analogous behavior (e.g., drug and alcohol use; r = .35). In an early meta-analysis, Pratt and Cullen (2000) provided evidence for Gottredson and Hirschi’s general theory of crime and the association between diminished self-control and criminal behavior (r = .23) and analogous behavior (e.g., drug and alcohol use; r = .35). In an early meta-analysis, Pratt and Cullen (2000) provided evidence for Gottredson and Hirschi’s general theory of crime and the association between diminished self-control and criminal behavior (r = .23) and analogous behavior (e.g., drug and alcohol use; r = .35). Results indicated no significant cohort differences (see Table 2 weighted models), indicating we can treat our data as one continuous cohort (age 15–25). We used the final propensity weight in all subsequent analyses.Next, we fit a taxonomy of auto-regressive latent trajectory with structured residuals (ALT-SR) models (Curran et al  2014) to examine the simultaneous between and within-person effects of victimization, binge drinking and impulse control across both adolescence and young adulthood. Fit statistics (Comparative Fit Index (CFI), Root Mean Square Error of Approximation (RMSEA), and Standardized Root Mean Square Residual (SRMR)) were used to assess improvement in model specification.Though missing data were minimal (~10% across 7 years), we utilized full-information maximum likelihood (FIML) estimator in Mplus version 7.4 (Muthén and Muthén 1998–2012) for all analyses. FIML treats all observed indicators as latent factors and allows each person to contribute whatever data is available instead of removing individuals with missing data. FIML treats all observed indicators as latent factors and allows each person to contribute whatever data is available instead of removing individuals with missing data. Propensity WeightingOverall, our propensity weighting resulted in reduced maximum standard effect sizes across all four cohorts (see Table 4). See Online Resources for additional propensity weighting output. For instance, transitions refer to the actual process of change whereas trajectories are defined as patterns of systematic and successive change over time (Elder 1998). Conversely, reporting more binge drinking than normal was associated with subsequent decreases in impulse control a year later (β = −.09; b = −.03,95%CI [−.05,−.01]). Conversely, reporting more binge drinking than normal was associated with subsequent decreases in impulse control a year later (β = −.09; b = −.03,95%CI [−.05,−.01]). Conversely, reporting more binge drinking than normal was associated with subsequent decreases in impulse control a year later (β = −.09; b = −.03,95%CI [−.05,−.01]). Conversely, reporting more binge drinking than normal was associated with subsequent decreases in impulse control a year later (β = −.09; b = −.03,95%CI [−.05,−.01]). Conversely, reporting more binge drinking than normal was associated with subsequent decreases in impulse control a year later (β = −.09; b = −.03,95%CI [−.05,−.01]). Conversely, reporting more binge drinking than normal was associated with subsequent decreases in impulse control a year later (β = −.09; b = −.03,95%CI [−.05,−.01]). Increased binge drinking was associated with experiencing more victimization (β = .06; b = .02,95%CI [.001,.04]) than normal the following year in age. Increased binge drinking was associated with experiencing more victimization (β = .06; b = .02,95%CI [.001,.04]) than normal the following year in age. Increased binge drinking was associated with experiencing more victimization (β = .06; b = .02,95%CI [.001,.04]) than normal the following year in age. Increased binge drinking was associated with experiencing more victimization (β = .06; b = .02,95%CI [.001,.04]) than normal the following year in age. Increased binge drinking was associated with experiencing more victimization (β = .06; b = .02,95%CI [.001,.04]) than normal the following year in age. Thus, we seek to understand how certain transitions (e.g., adolescence to young adulthood) are embedded into individual trajectories (e.g., binge drinking) that help point to important periods of life, which may reflect increases or decreases in functioning (e.g., variation in binge drinking trajectories based on age related transitions) (Rutter 1996). First, we considered limiting the number of control variables used in the model as our model utilized both propensity weighting and the weighting variables as controls for each model (doubly robust). Results of our model resulted in better model fit (expected given fewer parameters to estimate; CFI = .998, RMSEA = .028, SRMR = .030) with no changes to parameter estimates in both the overall and developmental model. That is, we eliminated the use of parent/caregiver data to ensure our results did not vary due to utilizing multi-informant data. That is, we eliminated the use of parent/caregiver data to ensure our results did not vary due to utilizing multi-informant data. Results of our models directly replicated our findings in both significance and direction of effects. Hirschi (2002) posited that an individual’s level of self-control will increase as youth transition into adulthood. However, it appears that beta estimates were slightly higher when excluding parent/caregiver data. Further, victimization during young adulthood did not predict dampened impulse control, thus indicating that exposure to violence during adolescence may have a much longer impact on impulse control processes (e.g., carry over into young adulthood) than previously thought (Baumeister and Vohs 2003). Further, victimization during young adulthood did not predict dampened impulse control, thus indicating that exposure to violence during adolescence may have a much longer impact on impulse control processes (e.g., carry over into young adulthood) than previously thought (Baumeister and Vohs 2003). Further, victimization during young adulthood did not predict dampened impulse control, thus indicating that exposure to violence during adolescence may have a much longer impact on impulse control processes (e.g., carry over into young adulthood) than previously thought (Baumeister and Vohs 2003). Future research should examine the physiological and developmental processes that underlie the associations found in the present study. Future research should examine the physiological and developmental processes that underlie the associations found in the present study. Second is the self-control strength model, which posits that self-control is a finite resource and, once depleted, leads to impaired self-control (Baumeister and Vohs 2003; Muraven and Baumeister 2000). Specifically, it may be that alcohol use is a risk factor for future victimization among males, as males are more likely to partake in situations promoting drinking (Huizinga et al  2000). Specifically, it may be that alcohol use is a risk factor for future victimization among males, as males are more likely to partake in situations promoting drinking (Huizinga et al  2000). Specifically, it may be that alcohol use is a risk factor for future victimization among males, as males are more likely to partake in situations promoting drinking (Huizinga et al  2000). Specifically, it may be that alcohol use is a risk factor for future victimization among males, as males are more likely to partake in situations promoting drinking (Huizinga et al  2000). Specifically, it may be that alcohol use is a risk factor for future victimization among males, as males are more likely to partake in situations promoting drinking (Huizinga et al  2000). Specifically, it may be that alcohol use is a risk factor for future victimization among males, as males are more likely to partake in situations promoting drinking (Huizinga et al  2000). Finally, post-hoc mediation analyses point to an important developmental difference between adolescence and young adulthood. Theoretical ContributionsOverall, these results support to several theoretical orientations. Specifically, our results lend to further support Gottfredson and Hirschi’s (1990)General Theory of Crime, which posits that deviant and criminal behaviors result from diminished self-control. Specifically, it may be that the current sample of early-onset juvenile offenders have initial deficits in self-control, thus putting them at greater risk for subsequent deviant behaviors (i.e., binge drinking) and further victimization. Thus, this theory would suggest that youth involved in the justice system are already at a disadvantage in terms of self-control. That is, we found developmental variation in the transition from adolescence to young adulthood in terms of individual levels of impulse control and victimization.Our findings further support the theory of allostatic load (McEwen 2003) and the self-control strength model (Baumeister and Vohs 2003). First, our sample is only generalizable to early onset juvenile delinquents. One intervention option is TARGET (Trauma Affect Regulation: Guide for Education and Therapy (Ford and Russo 2006). One intervention option is TARGET (Trauma Affect Regulation: Guide for Education and Therapy (Ford and Russo 2006). Finally, a number of studies have investigated psycho-pharmacological treatments for impulsivity (see Moeller et al  2001 for review). Recently, Evans and Kim (2012) explained that chronic exposure to stressors during childhood and adolescence (specifically among low-income youth) leads to disruption in self-regulatory processes (e.g., impulse control) that aid in coping with external and acute stressors. Recently, Evans and Kim (2012) explained that chronic exposure to stressors during childhood and adolescence (specifically among low-income youth) leads to disruption in self-regulatory processes (e.g., impulse control) that aid in coping with external and acute stressors. Recently, Evans and Kim (2012) explained that chronic exposure to stressors during childhood and adolescence (specifically among low-income youth) leads to disruption in self-regulatory processes (e.g., impulse control) that aid in coping with external and acute stressors. Recently, Evans and Kim (2012) explained that chronic exposure to stressors during childhood and adolescence (specifically among low-income youth) leads to disruption in self-regulatory processes (e.g., impulse control) that aid in coping with external and acute stressors. Recently, Evans and Kim (2012) explained that chronic exposure to stressors during childhood and adolescence (specifically among low-income youth) leads to disruption in self-regulatory processes (e.g., impulse control) that aid in coping with external and acute stressors. Thus, when an individual exerts repetitive efforts to self-regulate behavior, attempts thereafter should, in theory, fail, indicating a lapse in time when decision-making and impulsivity may play a larger role in problematic behaviors. For example, a recent meta-analysis found significant effects of impulse control depletion for self-control tasks, effort, negative affect, and blood glucose (Hagger et al  2010). For example, a recent meta-analysis found significant effects of impulse control depletion for self-control tasks, effort, negative affect, and blood glucose (Hagger et al  2010). For example, a recent meta-analysis found significant effects of impulse control depletion for self-control tasks, effort, negative affect, and blood glucose (Hagger et al  2010). For example, a recent meta-analysis found significant effects of impulse control depletion for self-control tasks, effort, negative affect, and blood glucose (Hagger et al  2010). This is especially true for youth with early-onset of problem behaviors (Egeland et al  2002; Moffitt and Caspi 2001). For example, early chronic stress has been shown to lead to poorer stress reactivity, impulse control, and HPA axis functioning in animals (Teicher et al  2006) and young adults (Andersen et al  2008). That is, when using longitudinal structural equation models (such as the ARCL) estimates are an odd amalgam of both within and between-person variance, thus making it difficult, if not impossible, to interpret. Second, in line with both the allostatic load and self-control strength model, we assessed if heightened individual levels of victimization were associated with wave-to-wave decreases in impulse control (lower than average trajectories) and increases in binge drinking (higher than average trajectories) (Hypothesis 2). Participants were enrolled in the study from two locations (Maricopa County, AZ and Philadelphia County, PA) between November 2000 and March 2003. Participants were enrolled in the study from two locations (Maricopa County, AZ and Philadelphia County, PA) between November 2000 and March 2003. Participants were enrolled in the study from two locations (Maricopa County, AZ and Philadelphia County, PA) between November 2000 and March 2003. Participants were enrolled in the study from two locations (Maricopa County, AZ and Philadelphia County, PA) between November 2000 and March 2003. Participants were enrolled in the study from two locations (Maricopa County, AZ and Philadelphia County, PA) between November 2000 and March 2003. To be eligible for this study, youth had to be charged with a felony crime or a similar non-felony crime (e.g., misdemeanor). Participants (Table 1) were predominantly male (87%), low socio-economic status (e.g., 80% of parents held a high school degree or less), and ethnically diverse with 41% participants identifying as African American, 34% as Hispanic, 21% as White, and 4% as Other. We used data from the baseline assessment in our propensity weighting analysis and as covariates in our statistical models. We used data from the baseline assessment in our propensity weighting analysis and as covariates in our statistical models. We used data from the baseline assessment in our propensity weighting analysis and as covariates in our statistical models. Example items include “have you been chased when you thought the person chasing you would hurt you in the past 12 months,” “have you been sexually assaulted,” and “have you been attacked with a weapon?” Reliability estimates range from α = .68 to 0.79. 