These data support the hypothesis that leptin has a stimulatory effect on HuH-28 cell migration, which is one of the characteristics of malignant cholangiocytes (1).Incubation with GCDC induced apoptosis in HuH-28 cholangiocarcinoma cells. It remains unknown, however, whether leptin directly regulate cholangiocarcinoma cell growth. In this study, thioacetamide dissolved in tap water at 0.03% was chronically administrated to the animals groups for a 24-week period. Significantly lower body weight gain was observed in the thioacetamide-fed lean and obese fa/fa Zucker rats beginning at 2 weeks posttreatment, compared with the correspondent lean and obese controls (Fig. At the time of sacrifice, the liver of the thioacetamide-treated animals had also decreased in weight after the ingestion of thioacetamide (control lean, 22.7 g ± 3.2 g versus thioacetamide-treated lean 16.3 g ± 0.6 g, P < 0.05; control fa/fa 26.4 g ± 0.5 g versus thioacetamide-treated fa/fa 21.2 g ± 1.5 g, P < 0.05; Fig. At the time of sacrifice, the liver of the thioacetamide-treated animals had also decreased in weight after the ingestion of thioacetamide (control lean, 22.7 g ± 3.2 g versus thioacetamide-treated lean 16.3 g ± 0.6 g, P < 0.05; control fa/fa 26.4 g ± 0.5 g versus thioacetamide-treated fa/fa 21.2 g ± 1.5 g, P < 0.05; Fig. The fact that these factors are commonly involved in the cholangiocarcinogenesis process indicates that the increasing of the circulating leptin promotes malignant growth of biliary epithelium. The fact that these factors are commonly involved in the cholangiocarcinogenesis process indicates that the increasing of the circulating leptin promotes malignant growth of biliary epithelium. The fact that these factors are commonly involved in the cholangiocarcinogenesis process indicates that the increasing of the circulating leptin promotes malignant growth of biliary epithelium. The fact that these factors are commonly involved in the cholangiocarcinogenesis process indicates that the increasing of the circulating leptin promotes malignant growth of biliary epithelium. In addition, some evidences indicate that obese patients present an increased incidence of biliary cancers (7, 42) and show a dose-dependent relationship between body mass index and cholangiocarcinoma (42). In addition, some evidences indicate that obese patients present an increased incidence of biliary cancers (7, 42) and show a dose-dependent relationship between body mass index and cholangiocarcinoma (42). In addition, some evidences indicate that obese patients present an increased incidence of biliary cancers (7, 42) and show a dose-dependent relationship between body mass index and cholangiocarcinoma (42). In addition, some evidences indicate that obese patients present an increased incidence of biliary cancers (7, 42) and show a dose-dependent relationship between body mass index and cholangiocarcinoma (42). Here, we showed the presence of leptin and leptin receptors in cholangiocytes and showed that increasing doses of leptin stimulate HuH-28 (e.g., intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma) cell proliferation in vitro in a dose-dependent manner up to 48 hours of incubation. Subsequently, we have shown that the stimulatory effect of leptin in cholangiocarcinoma cell growth was blocked by preincubation with AG490 and PD98059, respectively, JAK/STAT and MEK inhibitor, thus supporting the hypothesis that leptin, through stimulation of its own receptors, activates several intracellular mechanisms, among them JAK/STAT3 and ERK1/2, which lead to an increase of cholangiocarcinoma cell proliferation. The role played by STAT3 and ERK1/2 in regulating malignant cholangiocyte growth has been described (18, 45). Cytoselect Cell Migration Assay kit was purchased by Cell Biolabs, Inc. Cytoselect Cell Migration Assay kit was purchased by Cell Biolabs, Inc. Cell CultureWe used three human cholangiocarcinoma cell lines (Mz-ChA-1, HuH-28, and TFK-1) with different origins. Cell CultureWe used three human cholangiocarcinoma cell lines (Mz-ChA-1, HuH-28, and TFK-1) with different origins. Cell CultureWe used three human cholangiocarcinoma cell lines (Mz-ChA-1, HuH-28, and TFK-1) with different origins. Cell CultureWe used three human cholangiocarcinoma cell lines (Mz-ChA-1, HuH-28, and TFK-1) with different origins. Lean Zucker rats possess normal metabolic functions and represent ideal controls (48). Lean Zucker rats possess normal metabolic functions and represent ideal controls (48). This intriguing data suggests that malignant cholangiocytes could produce leptin, which contributes to modulate their own proliferation by an autocrine/ paracrine mechanism. Expression of Leptin ReceptorsMolecular analysisWe evaluated the expression of leptin receptor by reverse transcription PCR (RT-PCR) using total RNA from H-69, Mz-ChA-1, HuH-28, and TFK-1 cholangiocarcinoma cells. To check for RNA integrity, we used primers specific for human β actin (sense, 5′-GAAATCGTGCGTGACATTAAG-3′; antisense, 5′CTAGAAGCATTTGCGTTGGACGATGGAGGGGC-3′). We performed immunoblots as previously described (17, 18). We used the Cytoselect Cell Migration Assay kit according to the instructions given by the vendor. Briefly, after overnight starvation, HuH-28 cells were seeded at 30,000 cells per well in serum-free medium, in absence or presence of leptin (40 ng/mL) or fetal bovine serum (FBS) 10%, and were allowed to migrate toward FBS for 24 h. Migratory cells were subsequently lysed and detected by fluorescence measurement. Briefly, after overnight starvation, HuH-28 cells were seeded at 30,000 cells per well in serum-free medium, in absence or presence of leptin (40 ng/mL) or fetal bovine serum (FBS) 10%, and were allowed to migrate toward FBS for 24 h. Migratory cells were subsequently lysed and detected by fluorescence measurement. Briefly, after overnight starvation, HuH-28 cells were seeded at 30,000 cells per well in serum-free medium, in absence or presence of leptin (40 ng/mL) or fetal bovine serum (FBS) 10%, and were allowed to migrate toward FBS for 24 h. Migratory cells were subsequently lysed and detected by fluorescence measurement. Animals were housed for 2 additional wk in a temperature-controlled environment (20–22°C) with a 12-h light-dark cycle and with free access to drinking water and to standard rat diet. Moreover, many hormones, neuropeptides, and neurotransmitters regulate malignant and nonmalignant cholangiocyte pathophysiology in the course of chronic biliary diseases (3, 4). At the time of sacrifice, from each animal, liver was isolated, fixed in formalin, embedded in paraffin, and processed for histopathology. Morphologic Analysis of Liver TissuesAnimal liver tissues were fixed in formalin, embedded in paraffin, processed for histopathology, stained with H&E for routine examination or with CK19 for tumor visualization, and examined by light microscopy. Tumor sections (n = 4), obtained from each group of animals, were stained for c-Neu as previously described (17, 24, 25). After examination of the staining with a microscope, photographs of 4 different fields per section (selected in number of 10 from each animal in a blinded, random fashion) were taken. The quantitative analysis was performed using an Olympus microscope (Olympus Vanox AHBT3; Olympus Optical Co Ltd) equipped with a computerized image analysis system (CUE-3 Image Analyzer; Galai Production Ltd). Immunohistochemical staining for Hep Par 1, also known as hepatocyte antigen (27), and biliary cell–specific cytokeratin CK7 were performed in liver specimens obtained from thioacetamide-treated lean Zucker rats as previously described (27, 28). Immunohistochemical staining for Hep Par 1, also known as hepatocyte antigen (27), and biliary cell–specific cytokeratin CK7 were performed in liver specimens obtained from thioacetamide-treated lean Zucker rats as previously described (27, 28). HuH-28 cells were incubated in FBS-free medium with and without leptin (40 ng/mL) for 48 h. Western blot on protein extracts was performed as previously described (17, 18). Expression of leptin receptors and leptin in cholangiocytesImmortalized normal human cholangiocyte H69 cells and Mz-ChA-1, HuH28, and TFK-1 human cholangiocarcinoma cell lines expressed bands corresponding to a common sequence present in both short and long OBR isoforms, and to short and long isoforms of leptin receptor by RT-PCR (Fig. Leptin (10–80 ng/mL) significantly increased the proliferation index of HuH-28 cells after 24- and 48-hour incubation compared with basal values. Such an effect reached its highest after 15 minutes of incubation (Fig. There was no variation in total STAT3, total ERK1/2, and total AKT protein expression in HuH-28 cells incubated up to 30 min with 0.2% bovine serum albumin and with leptin (20–80 ng/mL). There was no variation in total STAT3, total ERK1/2, and total AKT protein expression in HuH-28 cells incubated up to 30 min with 0.2% bovine serum albumin and with leptin (20–80 ng/mL). There was no variation in total STAT3, total ERK1/2, and total AKT protein expression in HuH-28 cells incubated up to 30 min with 0.2% bovine serum albumin and with leptin (20–80 ng/mL). There was no variation in total STAT3, total ERK1/2, and total AKT protein expression in HuH-28 cells incubated up to 30 min with 0.2% bovine serum albumin and with leptin (20–80 ng/mL). 