The ALT level was highest in the histology cohort, reflecting that those with higher ALT levels were more likely to be referred for biopsy. These limitations are mitigated by the large sample size, relatively equal distribution of the cohort across the three different paediatric classes of obesity, and the analysis of liver disease severity using three current, clinically relevant approaches to assess liver disease severity Our data show that increasing severity of obesity, defined using current clinical classifications for paediatric severe obesity rather than BMI alone, is indeed associated with liver disease severity. The primary objective of this study was to determine whether the severity of obesity is associated with NAFLD severity in children with NAFLD, as determined using histology, imaging, and serologic markers of disease severity, in patients with varying degrees of obesity. 2.1 ∣Study designThis was a retrospective cohort study performed at the Steatohepatitis Center of Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center (CCHMC) in Cincinnati, Ohio. Patients are referred to the Steatohepatitis Center both via external referrals from primary care physicians as well as through internal referrals from subspecialists within CCHCM, such as emergency department physicians, endocrinologists, or cardiologists. Patients are referred to the Steatohepatitis Center both via external referrals from primary care physicians as well as through internal referrals from subspecialists within CCHCM, such as emergency department physicians, endocrinologists, or cardiologists. 2.4 ∣CohortsLiver disease severity was categorized in three different ways to reflect the currently available clinical modalities for assessing NAFLD, generating three separate cohorts that were studied individually:Biochemically determined liver disease severity: using the ALT level obtained closest to (and within 6 months from) the first clinic visit. The proportion of participants with a liver stiffness above a cutoff of 2.71 kPa was determined, as this has demonstrated an 85% specificity for discriminating children with early versus late stages of fibrosis (stages 0-1 vs 2-4, respectively) in one study,22 while comparable stiffness values (2.70 and 2.77 kPa) had best classification threshold at greater than or equal to 90% specificity for detecting any fibrosis versus no fibrosis in another paediatric study.23Histologically determined liver disease severity: liver biopsies previously obtained for clinical indications were reviewed. In addition to the marginal relationships, conditional relationships were also modelled between the liver severity outcomes and the BMI groups using analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) for the continuous outcomes, and logistic regression for the categorical outcomes. In addition to the marginal relationships, conditional relationships were also modelled between the liver severity outcomes and the BMI groups using analysis of covariance (ANCOVA) for the continuous outcomes, and logistic regression for the categorical outcomes. The covariates considered in the model selection were age, sex, ethnicity, T2DM status, metformin, and vitamin E use. Twenty seven (7%) were on vitamin E, 76 (21%) were on metformin, and 20 (6%) met the criteria for T2DM at the time of the MRI.The four obesity severity groups in the imaging cohort were different in terms of sex distribution (higher proportion of males in the more severe obesity categories, p = .020). Ten participants (4%) were on vitamin E, 71 (29%) were on metformin, and 24 (10%) met the criteria for T2DM at the time of biopsy.The obesity severity groups in the histology cohort were not different in terms of sex and ethnicity distribution, use of vitamin E or metformin, and T2DM diagnosis (Table 2).There was no significant difference between severity of steatosis, lobular inflammation, ballooning, portal inflammation, and fibrosis between the obesity severity groups (Table 3). Otherwise, sex, presence of type 2 diabetes, and vitamin E use did not differ based on BMI. Liver volume and liver stiffness both significantly correlated with BMI (P < .001; Table S2). Patients with a higher BMI had a higher stiffness after controlling for confounders (P < .0001; Table S3).Regarding the histologic cohort, non-Hispanic patients had higher BMI (P = .004; Table S1). BMI significantly correlated with steatosis score (P = .044), but not with the NAS, lobular inflammation, portal inflammation, ballooning, or fibrosis score (Table S2). The NASH-CRN requires biopsy confirmation of NAFLD for enrollment and therefore may be subject to selection bias for children with more advanced NAFLD. This is despite the fact that the cohorts were different in variables that reflect disease severity (eg, prevalence of T2DM and use of vitamin E treatment). The association of NAFLD severity with severe paediatric obesity extends the field, as pre-existing literature, which had analysed BMI as a continuous variable and had determined disease severity using histology, had not identified an association with higher BMI and liver disease severity.12,13 While ALT is considered an imprecise marker of liver disease severity,24 it is the tool of choice to screen for and monitor the progression of liver disease severity in the clinical setting.9 In our study, participants with class III obesity had higher serum ALT levels and increased odds of an ALT level > 80 U/L compared with participants with less obesity. While the proportion of patient with stiffness greater than 2.71 kPa did not differ among obesity groups, median liver stiffness values were highest among the children with class III obesity. Although liver stiffness using ultrasound or MR is well validated as a marker of advanced hepatic fibrosis, we did not find significant differences in the fibrosis stage or the frequency of advanced fibrosis by obesity class in the histology cohort.23 However, as MRE samples a greater proportion of the liver compared with biopsy, there may be potential for discordance between liver stiffness and histology due to sampling error, plus the limitation of assessing agreement between a continuous variable (liver stiffness) with categorical histological grading. 