Altogether, this means that it is impossible to visualize the entire microvasculature by these standard imaging methods. These data indicated that basal microvilli may have the ability to transport glucose into and out of the tumor milieu. These data indicated that basal microvilli may have the ability to transport glucose into and out of the tumor milieu. The change in GLUT-1 expression in MiaPaca-2 cells was fairly rapid, with an increase in GLUT-1 expression only within a few hours post-glucose starvation (Figure S6C). Although GLUT-1 expression in PDAC neoplastic cells is high, the distribution of GLUT-1 expression in the neoplasia is spatial and appears in a gradient pattern, with some areas very high and some areas very low (Figure S6D). Although GLUT-1 expression in PDAC neoplastic cells is high, the distribution of GLUT-1 expression in the neoplasia is spatial and appears in a gradient pattern, with some areas very high and some areas very low (Figure S6D). To assess the number of basal microvilli in areas with high or low GLUT-1 expression, we co-immunostained PDAC tumors with GLUT-1 and CD34. To assess the number of basal microvilli in areas with high or low GLUT-1 expression, we co-immunostained PDAC tumors with GLUT-1 and CD34. It implies that the presence of basal microvilli is inversely dependent upon GLUT-1 expression in the neoplasia. It implies that the presence of basal microvilli is inversely dependent upon GLUT-1 expression in the neoplasia. In all, these data suggest that these vascular microprojections may play a role in helping the tumor meet its high glucose needs. In all, these data suggest that these vascular microprojections may play a role in helping the tumor meet its high glucose needs. Our aim was to design a better imaging method that would be capable of revealing novel characteristics of microvessels. Altogether, these findings suggest that the KPC mouse model recapitulates the human PDAC vasculature, a novel discovery that will allow functional studies of the basal microvilli to be performed. Altogether, these findings suggest that the KPC mouse model recapitulates the human PDAC vasculature, a novel discovery that will allow functional studies of the basal microvilli to be performed. Altogether, these findings suggest that the KPC mouse model recapitulates the human PDAC vasculature, a novel discovery that will allow functional studies of the basal microvilli to be performed. Altogether, these findings suggest that the KPC mouse model recapitulates the human PDAC vasculature, a novel discovery that will allow functional studies of the basal microvilli to be performed. By using this modified immunostaining method, we discovered that PDAC tumors contain pathological vascular microprojections, or basal microvilli. Endothelial cells in normal tissues have apical primary cilium that function as mechanical sensors [42-44] and filopodia that are present only in depolarized endothelial tip cells[45]. Or, it is possible to target and ablate the glucose-trafficking basal microvilli as a method of starving the oncogenic KrasG12D-dependent tumor cells. Or, it is possible to target and ablate the glucose-trafficking basal microvilli as a method of starving the oncogenic KrasG12D-dependent tumor cells. Or, it is possible to target and ablate the glucose-trafficking basal microvilli as a method of starving the oncogenic KrasG12D-dependent tumor cells. Or, it is possible to target and ablate the glucose-trafficking basal microvilli as a method of starving the oncogenic KrasG12D-dependent tumor cells. HIF-1α expression was strong in only 1/12 PDAC samples by immunoblotting (Figure S2A). Only a small number of proliferating cells could be observed in the microvessel wall, which is considered to be the result of normal turn-over activity [24]. To do this, we co-immunostained tissues with markers for nascent and mature pericytes [NG2 and platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR)-β, nascent; Desmin and smooth muscle actin (SMA), mature], in combination with endothelial markers (CD31 or CD34). In contrast, we counted a significant number of NG2- and PDGFRβ-positive nascent pericytes in HCC microvessels (Table S2). However, the microvessels in HCC had an incomplete basement membrane, with some regions of the basal surface not covered by type collagen IV on the basement membrane at all (Figure S4A). However, the microvessels in HCC had an incomplete basement membrane, with some regions of the basal surface not covered by type collagen IV on the basement membrane at all (Figure S4A). Clinical data has shown that the high glucose uptake/perfusion ratio correlates with a poor outcome for PDAC patients, suggesting that PDAC tumors do not have to be highly perfused to be highly metabolically active [8]. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis revealed that these fine microvascular projections contain pinocytic vesicles, phagocytic bodies, macropinocytic pseudopods and large exocytic vesicles, as well as a rough endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria (Figure 3C). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis revealed that these fine microvascular projections contain pinocytic vesicles, phagocytic bodies, macropinocytic pseudopods and large exocytic vesicles, as well as a rough endoplasmic reticulum and mitochondria (Figure 3C). Altogether, these data suggested that these microvascular projections in PDAC tumors may function to increase nutrients transport and waste clearance.Based on these data, we named these endothelial-derived basal projections as “basal microvilli” because of their actin-rich cytoskeleton. Altogether, these data suggested that these microvascular projections in PDAC tumors may function to increase nutrients transport and waste clearance.Based on these data, we named these endothelial-derived basal projections as “basal microvilli” because of their actin-rich cytoskeleton. Altogether, these data suggested that these microvascular projections in PDAC tumors may function to increase nutrients transport and waste clearance.Based on these data, we named these endothelial-derived basal projections as “basal microvilli” because of their actin-rich cytoskeleton. Basal microvilli have low levels of phosphorylated VEGFR2Angiogenesis is induced by tumor production and release of VEGF, the ligand responsible for activating the receptor tyrosine kinase VEGFR2, under hypoxic conditions [14]. Basal microvilli have low levels of phosphorylated VEGFR2Angiogenesis is induced by tumor production and release of VEGF, the ligand responsible for activating the receptor tyrosine kinase VEGFR2, under hypoxic conditions [14]. Basal microvilli have low levels of phosphorylated VEGFR2Angiogenesis is induced by tumor production and release of VEGF, the ligand responsible for activating the receptor tyrosine kinase VEGFR2, under hypoxic conditions [14]. Thus, we were curious if basal microvilli mechanistically resembled VEGF-responsive angiogenic microvessels in other tumor types, so we co-immunostained for VEGFR2 and its active form, phosphorylated VEGFR2Y1175 (pVEGFR2pY1175) and VEGFR2Y996 (pVEGFR2pY996) with CD34 in PDAC (n=8), PanNET samples (n=3) and HBs (n=6) tumor samples (Table S3). Thus, we were curious if basal microvilli mechanistically resembled VEGF-responsive angiogenic microvessels in other tumor types, so we co-immunostained for VEGFR2 and its active form, phosphorylated VEGFR2Y1175 (pVEGFR2pY1175) and VEGFR2Y996 (pVEGFR2pY996) with CD34 in PDAC (n=8), PanNET samples (n=3) and HBs (n=6) tumor samples (Table S3). In PDAC microvessels, there was a negative correlation; microvessels with high VEGFR2 expression had fewer basal microvilli, while microvessels with low VEGFR2 expression had many basal microvilli (Figure 4A). These data suggest that, unlike microvessel growth seen in the angiogenic tumors, the microvessels and basal microvilli extending from the PDAC microvasculature have low levels of VEGFR2 expression and activation, and thus, may not depend on this signaling pathway for their growth and sustenance. Basal microvilli may enhance glucose trafficking between the microvessels and neoplastic cellsBased on the robust glucose uptake capacity seen in PDAC patients [7, 35], we hypothesized that the basal microvilli may serve as a conduit for glucose transport to neoplastic cells. 