The strict regulation of p53 activity is achieved through a number of positive and negative feedback loops. The strict regulation of p53 activity is achieved through a number of positive and negative feedback loops. Co-expression of dominant-negative CDK2 or CDK5 with cyclin G1 in U2OS cells resulted in a substantial increase in the half-life of cyclin G1, whereas the half-life of cyclin G1 coexpressed with wild-type CDK2 or CDK5 remained short. Co-expression of dominant-negative CDK2 or CDK5 with cyclin G1 in U2OS cells resulted in a substantial increase in the half-life of cyclin G1, whereas the half-life of cyclin G1 coexpressed with wild-type CDK2 or CDK5 remained short. Co-expression of dominant-negative CDK2 or CDK5 with cyclin G1 in U2OS cells resulted in a substantial increase in the half-life of cyclin G1, whereas the half-life of cyclin G1 coexpressed with wild-type CDK2 or CDK5 remained short. Another well-characterized p53 target, MDM2, functions as an oncogene when overexpressed, consistent with its role as a negative regulator of p53 (7). Another well-characterized p53 target, MDM2, functions as an oncogene when overexpressed, consistent with its role as a negative regulator of p53 (7). Another well-characterized p53 target, MDM2, functions as an oncogene when overexpressed, consistent with its role as a negative regulator of p53 (7). Another well-characterized p53 target, MDM2, functions as an oncogene when overexpressed, consistent with its role as a negative regulator of p53 (7). Coimmunoprecipitation experiments demonstrated that cyclin G1 was able to interact with all of the kinases tested, including dominant-negative versions. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments demonstrated that cyclin G1 was able to interact with all of the kinases tested, including dominant-negative versions. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments demonstrated that cyclin G1 was able to interact with all of the kinases tested, including dominant-negative versions. However, no activity was detected in in vitro kinase assays using histone H1 and GST-Rb (C-terminus) as substrates (data not shown). However, no activity was detected in in vitro kinase assays using histone H1 and GST-Rb (C-terminus) as substrates (data not shown). However, we did detect abnormal nuclei in some cyclin G1 overexpressing cells similar to those described for cyclin G2 overexpressing cells (data not shown and (25)). Overall, it seems unlikely that cyclin G1 negatively regulates cyclin-CDK complexes required for cell cycle progression under routine culture conditions. Overall, it seems unlikely that cyclin G1 negatively regulates cyclin-CDK complexes required for cell cycle progression under routine culture conditions. Overall, it seems unlikely that cyclin G1 negatively regulates cyclin-CDK complexes required for cell cycle progression under routine culture conditions. Overall, it seems unlikely that cyclin G1 negatively regulates cyclin-CDK complexes required for cell cycle progression under routine culture conditions. We treated NIH-3T3 cells with doxorubicin to induce p53 and cyclin G1 and the resulting increase in cyclin G1 protein level is apparent (Fig. We treated NIH-3T3 cells with doxorubicin to induce p53 and cyclin G1 and the resulting increase in cyclin G1 protein level is apparent (Fig. We treated NIH-3T3 cells with doxorubicin to induce p53 and cyclin G1 and the resulting increase in cyclin G1 protein level is apparent (Fig. 2A, right panel).We also examined endogenous cyclin G1 protein in the A1−5 rat fibroblast cell line. When A1−5 cells maintained at 32°C for 36 hours were treated with cycloheximide, the cyclin G1 protein was short-lived (Fig. When A1−5 cells maintained at 32°C for 36 hours were treated with cycloheximide, the cyclin G1 protein was short-lived (Fig. When A1−5 cells maintained at 32°C for 36 hours were treated with cycloheximide, the cyclin G1 protein was short-lived (Fig. Although p53 increases the level of cyclin G1 transcript, it does not appear to create a stabilizing environment for the cyclin G1 protein in either A1−5 or 3T3 cells. Although p53 increases the level of cyclin G1 transcript, it does not appear to create a stabilizing environment for the cyclin G1 protein in either A1−5 or 3T3 cells. Although p53 increases the level of cyclin G1 transcript, it does not appear to create a stabilizing environment for the cyclin G1 protein in either A1−5 or 3T3 cells. Furthermore, cyclin G1 stability does not correlate with proliferative state, since there is no difference in the half-life of cyclin G1 in proliferating transfected U2OS cells compared to that in p53-arrested NIH-3T3 or A1−5 cells. Treatment of A1−5 cells at 32°C with MG-132 resulted in a substantial increase in the stability of cyclin G1 in comparison to the DMSO treated control (from ∼20 minutes to ∼2 hours; Fig. 2C).In order to test whether proteasome inhibitors could increase the levels of endogenous cyclin G1 in undamaged cells, we treated a variety of cell lines with MG-132 and observed a consequent increase in cyclin G1 protein (Fig. To test this p53-independent increase more directly, we examined the endogenous cyclin G1 protein in Saos2 cells that lack p53. To test this p53-independent increase more directly, we examined the endogenous cyclin G1 protein in Saos2 cells that lack p53. To test this p53-independent increase more directly, we examined the endogenous cyclin G1 protein in Saos2 cells that lack p53. These processes result in a feedback mechanism to limit p53 activity. In a similar experiment, HA antibodies were used to IP the tagged ubiquitin and blots were probed for Flag-cyclin G1 (Fig. ARF physically interacts with MDM2 and antagonizes its ability to negatively regulate p53. A similar pattern was seen by immunostaining wild-type MEFs cells treated with DNA-damaging agents to induce endogenous cyclin G1 (Fig. A similar pattern was seen by immunostaining wild-type MEFs cells treated with DNA-damaging agents to induce endogenous cyclin G1 (Fig. A similar pattern was seen by immunostaining wild-type MEFs cells treated with DNA-damaging agents to induce endogenous cyclin G1 (Fig. Cyclin G1 has been categorized as a cyclin because it contains a region of protein sequence homology, the cyclin box, common to all members of the cyclin family of cell cycle regulators (15). Expression of the ΔRing mutant resulted in a reduced level of both poly- and monoubiquitinated cyclin G1 in both cell lines when compared to wild-type MDM2. Cyclins are dependent on the cyclin box to associate with specific kinase partners CDKs and regulate their kinase activity during the cell cycle (16). U2OS cells were synchronized by a double thymidine block and infected with adenovirus co-expressing GFP marker and cyclin G1 or KD. U2OS cells were synchronized by a double thymidine block and infected with adenovirus co-expressing GFP marker and cyclin G1 or KD. As shown in Figure 6D; control, cyclin G1 and KD infected cells demonstrated similar cell cycle profiles following synchronization with thymidine prior to irradiation. Finally, mutation of the cyclin box of cyclin G1 has an effect on the establishment and/or maintenance of the G2/M arrest following DNA damage of cells overexpressing cyclin G1. Finally, mutation of the cyclin box of cyclin G1 has an effect on the establishment and/or maintenance of the G2/M arrest following DNA damage of cells overexpressing cyclin G1. Finally, mutation of the cyclin box of cyclin G1 has an effect on the establishment and/or maintenance of the G2/M arrest following DNA damage of cells overexpressing cyclin G1. Whether stabilized cyclin G1 has a role in the nucleolus remains a question for further study. Whether stabilized cyclin G1 has a role in the nucleolus remains a question for further study. Whether stabilized cyclin G1 has a role in the nucleolus remains a question for further study. Whether stabilized cyclin G1 has a role in the nucleolus remains a question for further study. However, we did detect a defect in the G2/M checkpoint following γ-irradiation in KD expressing cells. Cyclin G1 has been shown to interact with GAK (cyclin G-associated kinase) and CDK5, although the physiological significance of these interactions remains unclear (19). Ectopic overexpression of cyclin G1 has also been reported to accelerate cell proliferation (31-33). Ectopic overexpression of cyclin G1 has also been reported to accelerate cell proliferation (31-33). Dephosphorylation of MDM2 at T216 results in increased complex formation between MDM2 and p53 and subsequent degradation of p53. Dephosphorylation of MDM2 at T216 results in increased complex formation between MDM2 and p53 and subsequent degradation of p53. p19ARF was a gift from Karl Munger and p14ARF was kindly provided by Martine Roussel. HRP-conjugated donkey anti-rabbit or anti-mouse secondary antibodies (Jackson Immunoresearch) were diluted 1:10,000 or 1:5000 in TNET and detected by ECL (NEN). For half-life experiments in transfected U2OS cells, a single transfected 10-cm dish was trypsinized and plated in 5 wells of a 6-well dish. Quantitation of bands was performed using ImageJ. Quantitation of bands was performed using ImageJ. Coverslips were blocked with 5% normal goat serum in PBS and incubated with primary antibody for 1 hour at RT. Recombinants were selected using kanamycin and confirmed by restriction digest. We created both a non-conservative mutation of lysine to aspartic acid and a conservative mutation to arginine, an amino acid that naturally exists at this position in cyclin F and cyclin G2. We created both a non-conservative mutation of lysine to aspartic acid and a conservative mutation to arginine, an amino acid that naturally exists at this position in cyclin F and cyclin G2. Additionally, we noted a substantial increase in the steady-state level of the KD mutant, suggesting an increase in protein stability. The instability of cyclin G1 was not predicted by its sequence as it encodes neither a PEST sequence nor a destruction box motif found in mitotic cyclins (36).The half-lives of the wild-type and mutant cyclin G1 proteins were determined by treating transfected U2OS cells with cycloheximide (Fig. 