We based our titration on the total number of looks, rather than the number of looks in a given trial type, to avoid training the monkeys to show a difference. Monkeys were tested in this manner until they completed two consecutive sessions in which the tray height had not changed. Monkeys were tested in this manner until they completed two consecutive sessions in which the tray height had not changed. However, their performance is not as high as might be expected if their memories were strong. 3, white bars; appropriate: mean = 0.46, late: mean = 0.51, t3 = −0.21, P = 0.845), demonstrating a strong tendency to look even when it should have been unnecessary. 3, white bars; appropriate: mean = 0.46, late: mean = 0.51, t3 = −0.21, P = 0.845), demonstrating a strong tendency to look even when it should have been unnecessary. 3, white bars; appropriate: mean = 0.46, late: mean = 0.51, t3 = −0.21, P = 0.845), demonstrating a strong tendency to look even when it should have been unnecessary. Monkeys were required to reach criterion on each of three consecutive sessions with the visual barrier before each test session. Our hypothesis was that interleaving sessions with the visual barrier with test sessions would increase the monkeys’ attention to the baiting on test trials. The delay between baiting and access was decreased by 1 s if the monkeys scored 10 or fewer correct out of 24 on each of two consecutive days. The delay between baiting and access was decreased by 1 s if the monkeys scored 10 or fewer correct out of 24 on each of two consecutive days. Monkeys moved on to the main task if they performed at criterion level (21 out of 24 correct) with the 2-s delay for each of three consecutive days.Main taskThe main task was conducted as in Experiment 1 with the exception that the tray was already at the lowest height. Results and discussionMonkeys required nearly as many sessions to relearn to attend to the baiting as they did to learn initially in Phase 2 of Experiment 1, suggesting that they were indeed not attending to the baiting by the end of Experiment 1. On seen trials, the monkeys also terminated the majority of their trials appropriately (mean = 0.74). In addition, looking behavior delayed the retrieval of food, thereby incurring a temporal cost as well. In addition, looking behavior delayed the retrieval of food, thereby incurring a temporal cost as well. The less knowledge subjects felt they had about the to-be-tested domain, the more they would study. The less knowledge subjects felt they had about the to-be-tested domain, the more they would study. The less knowledge subjects felt they had about the to-be-tested domain, the more they would study. Monkeys had to lift the flap, hold it open, and crouch to look down a tube. The monkeys could not just move their head across the tube openings and quickly scan all tubes, as they could in Experiments 1 and 2. The monkeys could not just move their head across the tube openings and quickly scan all tubes, as they could in Experiments 1 and 2. The monkeys could not just move their head across the tube openings and quickly scan all tubes, as they could in Experiments 1 and 2. The monkeys could not just move their head across the tube openings and quickly scan all tubes, as they could in Experiments 1 and 2. MethodsSubjects and apparatusThe same subjects used previously were used again. MethodsSubjects and apparatusThe same subjects used previously were used again. Accordingly, we expected the monkeys to use the flaps upon first exposure. Accordingly, we expected the monkeys to use the flaps upon first exposure. Accordingly, we expected the monkeys to use the flaps upon first exposure. The primary dependent measure was whether the monkeys, like human subjects, sought more information when needed, but avoided doing so when more information was not needed. Results and discussionIncreasing the cost of searching did have the expected effect of decreasing unnecessary looking, but also decreased the number of necessary searches. Results and discussionIncreasing the cost of searching did have the expected effect of decreasing unnecessary looking, but also decreased the number of necessary searches. Results and discussionIncreasing the cost of searching did have the expected effect of decreasing unnecessary looking, but also decreased the number of necessary searches. χ(1)2=0.17, P = 0.683; GI: χ(1)2=1.02, P = 0.312; IK: χ(1)2=3.42, P = 0.064; LE: χ(1)2=1.33, P = 0.248; SQ: χ(1)2=1.50, P = 0.221). Call and Carpenter (2001) developed a foraging task based on this principle to assess memory awareness in primates. This lack of differential looking is not due to a lack of knowledge, as evidenced by looking behavior on seen trials. This lack of differential looking is not due to a lack of knowledge, as evidenced by looking behavior on seen trials. This lack of differential looking is not due to a lack of knowledge, as evidenced by looking behavior on seen trials. After looking on unseen trials, monkeys showed a nonsignificant trend toward being more accurate than expected by chance in selecting the correct tube (mean = 0.65; t4 = 2.68, P = 0.055; chance = 0.25). Brauer et al  (2004) experienced the opposite problem with dogs in a similar experiment. Future studies of memory awareness might benefit from manipulating the benefit of the food rather than the cost of looking, either through the number or quality of rewards or the hunger of the subject. This can occur when the costs and benefits of seeking more information are unbalanced. Thus, positive evidence for memory awareness (some of which was reported here) should not be discounted due to the presence of unnecessary searches on some trials or under some conditions. Thus, positive evidence for memory awareness (some of which was reported here) should not be discounted due to the presence of unnecessary searches on some trials or under some conditions. Thus, positive evidence for memory awareness (some of which was reported here) should not be discounted due to the presence of unnecessary searches on some trials or under some conditions. Thus, positive evidence for memory awareness (some of which was reported here) should not be discounted due to the presence of unnecessary searches on some trials or under some conditions. Non-metacognitive accountsThe inference of memory awareness is valid only if capuchins base their search strategy on judgments about the contents of their own memory. Accordingly, we would expect capuchins to have an overall tendency to choose without looking. It is the case that rather than immediately reaching for the food after seeing it, as response competition would predict, the monkeys sometimes continued to search the remaining tubes. While this could suggest a search for more information (e.g., an exhaustive search), it could also suggest that, in capuchins, the reaching response is weak compared to the searching response under these testing conditions. First, the capuchins were initially more explorative and less willing to attend to the baiting. Looking on unseen trials resulted in high choice accuracy, first-looks on seen trials were most often to the correct tube, and the monkeys most often immediately stopped looking after seeing the food. Third, their searches were appropriate, continuing until the food was found and then stopping. Nonetheless, the positive results from Experiment 2 are consistent with the existence of memory awareness in capuchins. These results show that apes and human children adaptively collect more information when ignorant. Monkeys also sought more hints for novel sequences relative to familiar ones. Similarly, one out of five orangutans was significantly more accurate on a foraging task when she chose to take the test than when she was forced to take it (Suda-King 2007). By contrast, evidence from non-primates suggests that memory awareness may not be universal among vertebrates. Dogs literally pass by the opportunity to seek a hint when faced with an uncertain choice (Brauer et al  2004). Dogs literally pass by the opportunity to seek a hint when faced with an uncertain choice (Brauer et al  2004). Dogs literally pass by the opportunity to seek a hint when faced with an uncertain choice (Brauer et al  2004). Dogs literally pass by the opportunity to seek a hint when faced with an uncertain choice (Brauer et al  2004). To determine when memory awareness evolved, it would be useful to study additional primate species, especially New World monkeys. However, if New World monkeys do show evidence of memory awareness, it would suggest that our capacity for memory awareness evolved earlier, in a common ancestor of all monkeys and apes. However, if New World monkeys do show evidence of memory awareness, it would suggest that our capacity for memory awareness evolved earlier, in a common ancestor of all monkeys and apes. However, if New World monkeys do show evidence of memory awareness, it would suggest that our capacity for memory awareness evolved earlier, in a common ancestor of all monkeys and apes. However, if New World monkeys do show evidence of memory awareness, it would suggest that our capacity for memory awareness evolved earlier, in a common ancestor of all monkeys and apes. On each trial, they could either seek more information by searching the four tubes or choose a tube without looking. Four tubes (2.5 cm diameter × 16.6 cm length) were affixed to a metal tray 9.5 cm apart (Fig. Four tubes (2.5 cm diameter × 16.6 cm length) were affixed to a metal tray 9.5 cm apart (Fig. Each tube attached via a hinge near the front of the tray such that it could be pulled up like a lever, causing any food inside to roll out toward the monkey. The tray on which the tubes were mounted could be placed at one of five different heights. Two barriers could be lowered independently between the cage and the tubes apparatus. Two barriers could be lowered independently between the cage and the tubes apparatus. The first, a transparent screen, allowed visual, but not physical access to the tubes. The first, a transparent screen, allowed visual, but not physical access to the tubes. The first, a transparent screen, allowed visual, but not physical access to the tubes. It was connected to a monitor on the side of the testing set-up so that the experimenter could view and score the monkeys’ looking behavior without staring directly down the tubes and possibly influencing looks or choices.Behavior scoringThe experimenter sat to the side of the apparatus and watched the closed circuit television monitor. It was connected to a monitor on the side of the testing set-up so that the experimenter could view and score the monkeys’ looking behavior without staring directly down the tubes and possibly influencing looks or choices.Behavior scoringThe experimenter sat to the side of the apparatus and watched the closed circuit television monitor. It was connected to a monitor on the side of the testing set-up so that the experimenter could view and score the monkeys’ looking behavior without staring directly down the tubes and possibly influencing looks or choices.Behavior scoringThe experimenter sat to the side of the apparatus and watched the closed circuit television monitor. It was connected to a monitor on the side of the testing set-up so that the experimenter could view and score the monkeys’ looking behavior without staring directly down the tubes and possibly influencing looks or choices.Behavior scoringThe experimenter sat to the side of the apparatus and watched the closed circuit television monitor. It was connected to a monitor on the side of the testing set-up so that the experimenter could view and score the monkeys’ looking behavior without staring directly down the tubes and possibly influencing looks or choices.Behavior scoringThe experimenter sat to the side of the apparatus and watched the closed circuit television monitor. It was connected to a monitor on the side of the testing set-up so that the experimenter could view and score the monkeys’ looking behavior without staring directly down the tubes and possibly influencing looks or choices.Behavior scoringThe experimenter sat to the side of the apparatus and watched the closed circuit television monitor. Looks were scored if the monkey’s eye was occluded by the tube, as viewed through the closed circuit television. Looks were scored if the monkey’s eye was occluded by the tube, as viewed through the closed circuit television. Determining the extent to which nonhuman animals are aware of their knowledge will inform research into when and why memory awareness might have evolved and research into what aspects of cognition we share with other animals. On seen trials the opaque screen was raised prior to baiting, allowing the monkey to observe the baiting procedure through the transparent screen. Next, the experimenter raised the clear screen, which allowed the monkey to choose one tube. Next, the experimenter raised the clear screen, which allowed the monkey to choose one tube. Next, the experimenter raised the clear screen, which allowed the monkey to choose one tube. Next, the experimenter raised the clear screen, which allowed the monkey to choose one tube. Next, the experimenter raised the clear screen, which allowed the monkey to choose one tube. Next, the experimenter raised the clear screen, which allowed the monkey to choose one tube. Next, the experimenter raised the clear screen, which allowed the monkey to choose one tube. The sequence of seen and unseen trials and the location of the food reward followed a pseudorandom order, with the constraint that no trial type or location appeared more than four times in a row. The sequence of seen and unseen trials and the location of the food reward followed a pseudorandom order, with the constraint that no trial type or location appeared more than four times in a row. The sequence of seen and unseen trials and the location of the food reward followed a pseudorandom order, with the constraint that no trial type or location appeared more than four times in a row. The sequence of seen and unseen trials and the location of the food reward followed a pseudorandom order, with the constraint that no trial type or location appeared more than four times in a row. 