The expression of ODD occurs only in the cardiomyocytes as a result of the specificity of the myosin light-chain promoter. Third, the therapeutic potential of rapamycin can be exerted by its direct effect on the expression of other genes in vascular cells. Third, the therapeutic potential of rapamycin can be exerted by its direct effect on the expression of other genes in vascular cells. Third, the therapeutic potential of rapamycin can be exerted by its direct effect on the expression of other genes in vascular cells. Rapamycin binds to the FK-binding protein 12 (FKB12) forming a complex that binds to the mammalian targets of rapamycin (mTOR), inhibiting both DNA and protein synthesis. It is the complex of the bipartite transcription factor consisting of two chimeric human peptides. The expression of VEGF was sufficient to induce the formation of new blood vessels. Thus, the hypoxia-regulated production of VEGF may prevent the negative aspects of high expression of this potent angiogenic factor. Moreover, the combination of HRE-dependent regulation of VEGF expression and the cardiac-specific over-expression of HIF-1 may offer additional benefits, limiting the transgene expression only to the ischemic heart (52). In this study, mice myoblasts were stably transduced with retroviral vector harboring VEGF. Another approach is to use the combination of genes of various growth factors. IRES allows the cap-independent translation, and it can permit the protein synthesis also under hypoxic conditions (62). IRES allows the cap-independent translation, and it can permit the protein synthesis also under hypoxic conditions (62). IRES allows the cap-independent translation, and it can permit the protein synthesis also under hypoxic conditions (62). IRES allows the cap-independent translation, and it can permit the protein synthesis also under hypoxic conditions (62). Some experiments demonstrated the feasibility of such an approach (46,64). Our data obtained from in vitro experiments have recently been corroborated in animal studies, which showed the stimulation of angiogenesis in ischemic tissues by gene transfer of NOS III (71) or the HO-1 gene (72). Our data obtained from in vitro experiments have recently been corroborated in animal studies, which showed the stimulation of angiogenesis in ischemic tissues by gene transfer of NOS III (71) or the HO-1 gene (72). The beneficial effect of HO-1 gene transfer on prevention of restenosis after balloon angioplasty also has been shown (36,79). It can be suggested that similar beneficial effects can be applied for the prevention of ischemia reperfusion injury in myocardial infarction (46,81). Plasmids were injected into the mouse heart subjected to myocardial ischemia. Ischemia in such pre-treated hearts resulted in approximately a 50-fold induction in human HO-1 over endogenous rat HO-1, whereas the rise of the latter was delayed by about 12 h and did not reach the level attained from the transgene. Furthermore, Agrawal and coworkers (82) have evaluated the preemptive gene therapy using extracellular SOD (EC-SOD and SOD3). Furthermore, Agrawal and coworkers (82) have evaluated the preemptive gene therapy using extracellular SOD (EC-SOD and SOD3). AAV-mediated delivery of EC-SOD, driven by a constitutive promoter, prevented the injury caused by myocardial infarction induced 6 wk later. As expected, hypoxia strongly induced the production of VEGF (Fig. Cells were treated with cobalt chloride to mimic hypoxia conditions (85). Cells were treated with cobalt chloride to mimic hypoxia conditions (85). Gene therapy with proangiogenic factors did not fulfill the initial promise. Gene therapy with proangiogenic factors did not fulfill the initial promise. In such a situation, other potentially therapeutic genes are tested. In such a situation, other potentially therapeutic genes are tested. Among them, HO-1 emerges as an important target for interventions in various diseases. The coming years should provide more data demonstrating the feasibility of such an approach in animal models and first clinical trials. These vehicles were applied in the first trials of gene therapy and still constitute the larger proportions of vectors used in clinical trials. These vehicles were applied in the first trials of gene therapy and still constitute the larger proportions of vectors used in clinical trials. It is necessary to follow this road with the aim of transforming gene therapy from a purely experimental to a more therapeutic approach. The limitation of oncoretroviral vectors is their inability to transduce nondividing cells. Nevertheless, they can efficiently deliver genes to proliferating progenitor cells; in addition, this type of modification has enabled the treatment of severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) in children lacking the gene for common γc chain of cytokine receptor (7–9). This integration requires Rep proteins encoded by one of two genes of wild-type AAV. Nevertheless, recombinant AAV vectors can randomly integrate in low proportions into the chromosomal DNA, although the majority of AAV vectors remain in episomal forms. The nonpathogenic nature of AAV decreases the risk of an inflammatory response (17). Modifications of the viral capsids (22) as well as the exploitation of the different tropism of other AAV serotypes (23) offer new possibilities to match AAV to vascular cells.Limitation of Viral VectorsInflammatory response is a major concern in the application of adenoviral vectors. It is therefore impossible in a short review to discuss all crucial aspects of gene therapy, including even the newest strategies for a given type of disease. It is therefore impossible in a short review to discuss all crucial aspects of gene therapy, including even the newest strategies for a given type of disease. They are very efficient in transducing various cell types irrespective of the stage of their cell cycle; and in endothelial cells, a transduction efficiency up to 75% or more in vivo has been reported (17). They are very efficient in transducing various cell types irrespective of the stage of their cell cycle; and in endothelial cells, a transduction efficiency up to 75% or more in vivo has been reported (17). They are very efficient in transducing various cell types irrespective of the stage of their cell cycle; and in endothelial cells, a transduction efficiency up to 75% or more in vivo has been reported (17). They are very efficient in transducing various cell types irrespective of the stage of their cell cycle; and in endothelial cells, a transduction efficiency up to 75% or more in vivo has been reported (17). Therefore, in a short time after transduction, the immune response develops against viral proteins. Moreover, the construction of the new class of adenoviral vectors, or so-called helper-dependent vectors, creates new, exciting possibilities (26). This strategy relies on the delivery of short, about 20-bp, double-stranded oligonucleotides, containing the sequence to which this transcription factor binds in the promoter of genes, particularly those involved in cell proliferation. This strategy relies on the delivery of short, about 20-bp, double-stranded oligonucleotides, containing the sequence to which this transcription factor binds in the promoter of genes, particularly those involved in cell proliferation. This strategy relies on the delivery of short, about 20-bp, double-stranded oligonucleotides, containing the sequence to which this transcription factor binds in the promoter of genes, particularly those involved in cell proliferation. In such a way, the expression of several genes, e.g., c-myc, c-myb, or PCNA is prevented. However, the approach still requires validation in larger randomized clinical trials. However, the approach still requires validation in larger randomized clinical trials. Thus, the progress in cardiovascular gene therapy is slower than expected. Therefore, besides solving those problems, it also seems reasonable to look for the other strategies to ameliorate ischemia and to prevent the consequences of myocardial infarction. Therefore, besides solving those problems, it also seems reasonable to look for the other strategies to ameliorate ischemia and to prevent the consequences of myocardial infarction. This study demonstrates the feasibility of the combination of gene with stem cell therapy in cardiovascular diseases and highlights again the important role of nitric oxide (NO) in the endothelial function. This study demonstrates the feasibility of the combination of gene with stem cell therapy in cardiovascular diseases and highlights again the important role of nitric oxide (NO) in the endothelial function. This study demonstrates the feasibility of the combination of gene with stem cell therapy in cardiovascular diseases and highlights again the important role of nitric oxide (NO) in the endothelial function. Regulated Gene Expression TherapyThe level of therapeutic gene expression determines the efficiency of gene therapy. This potent angiogenic factor has been tested for the stimulation of blood vessel formation in ischemic heart and skeletal muscles. Interestingly, some experiments demonstrated that high and unregulated expression of VEGF may lead to harmful effects. Degradation of HIF-1α is dependent on the action of the oxygen-dependent prolyl hydroxylase, which by adding hydroxyl groups to specific proline residues (P402 and P564) present in so-called oxygen-dependent degradation (ODD) domain, creates the signal for von-Hippel-Lindau (VHL) ligase. Degradation of HIF-1α is dependent on the action of the oxygen-dependent prolyl hydroxylase, which by adding hydroxyl groups to specific proline residues (P402 and P564) present in so-called oxygen-dependent degradation (ODD) domain, creates the signal for von-Hippel-Lindau (VHL) ligase. The following interesting experimental strategies, applying the so-called vigilant vectors, have been tested (46–49); for reviews of other strategies, see refs. 