Three NFκB target genes with known roles in breast cancer progression were examined through qPCR to validate the results from the NFκB pathway PCR array: interleukin 6 (IL6), intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM1), and TNFα-induced protein 3 (A20, TNFAIP3) (Fig. Three NFκB target genes with known roles in breast cancer progression were examined through qPCR to validate the results from the NFκB pathway PCR array: interleukin 6 (IL6), intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM1), and TNFα-induced protein 3 (A20, TNFAIP3) (Fig. The suppression of IL6, ICAM1, and TNFAIP3 expression by COUP-TFII is in agreement with the data from the NFκB PCR array. A mechanism for the involvement of COUP-TFII in maintenance of endocrine sensitivity has not yet been determined. A mechanism for the involvement of COUP-TFII in maintenance of endocrine sensitivity has not yet been determined. A mechanism for the involvement of COUP-TFII in maintenance of endocrine sensitivity has not yet been determined. A mechanism for the involvement of COUP-TFII in maintenance of endocrine sensitivity has not yet been determined. Our data appear to differ from a report by Riggins et al  (2005) showing higher RelA/p65 and equal NFκB1 p50 protein levels in LCC9 and LCC1 cells, but we note that we are comparing LCC9 with MCF-7, not LCC1 cells. Thus, COUP-TFII inhibits TNFα-induced increases in NFκB1 and RelB at both the mRNA and protein levels in LCC9 cells. Future plans include dissecting the time course of COUP-TFII’s effect on mRNA and protein expression. COUP-TFII and NFκB expression are inversely correlated in breast cancer patient samplesTo examine the relationship between COUP-TFII and NFκB in breast cancer patients, publically available microarray gene expression data from 298 ERα+ patients treated with tamoxifen for 5 years was analyzed using the Spearman Rho (ρS) statistic determine if there was a correlation between COUP-TFII expression and the expression of NFκB subunits and target genes. COUP-TFII (NR2F2) expression was inversely correlated with NFκB subunit genes NFKB2, REL, RELA, and RELB and NFκB target genes ICAM1, IL6, and TNFAIP3 (Table 1). 4) detected in LCC9 cells. It is possible that RELB, while higher in expression, might not be activated in LCC9 and thus, would not be expected to enter the nucleus. Also present in the cytoplasm is the IKK complex containing the regulatory subunit NEMO (nuclear factor-κB essential modulator or IKKγ) and the catalytic subunits IKKα and IKKβ. While TNFα increased NFκB1 p50 activation in MCF-7 cells, no increase was detected in LCC9 cells. COUP-TFII inhibited NFκB1/p50 more than RelA. Because NFκB activation results in expression of genes that lead to antiapoptotic and pro-proliferative activities, increased NFκB signaling promotes cancer cell survival (Perkins, 2007). 5), and inhibited target gene expression (Fig. 5), and inhibited target gene expression (Fig. 5), and inhibited target gene expression (Fig. 5), and inhibited target gene expression (Fig. Each of these coactivators also have known interactions with COUP-TFII (Litchfield and Klinge, 2012). Each of these coactivators also have known interactions with COUP-TFII (Litchfield and Klinge, 2012). TNFα increased Firefly luciferase activity ~10-fold (data not shown). Cotransfection with COUP-TFII decreased the TNFα-activated luciferase activity ~50%, similar to the data in Fig. Elevated p50/NFκB1-DNA binding correlated with metastatic relapse and reduced disease-free survival in patients with ERα-positive tumors (Zhou et al , 2005a,b). Two p-RelA Ser 529 bands were detected and quantified relative to the β-actin loading control. Two p-RelA Ser 529 bands were detected and quantified relative to the β-actin loading control. 9A, white bars) exhibited a reduction in the higher range of BMS-345541 concentrations (Fig. This inhibition led to downregulation of TNFα-induced NFκB target gene expression of IL6, ICAM1, and TNFAIP3, which had reduced basal and/or TNFα-induced expression upon COUP-TFII overexpression. This inhibition led to downregulation of TNFα-induced NFκB target gene expression of IL6, ICAM1, and TNFAIP3, which had reduced basal and/or TNFα-induced expression upon COUP-TFII overexpression. This inhibition led to downregulation of TNFα-induced NFκB target gene expression of IL6, ICAM1, and TNFAIP3, which had reduced basal and/or TNFα-induced expression upon COUP-TFII overexpression. Similarly, c-Rel is also capable of autoregulation (Hannink and Temin, 1990). Because COUP-TFII suppresses genes that are targets of the NFκB pathway, this would also be expected to lead to reduced expression of the NFκB subunits as observed. Since COUP-TFII expression is decreased in endocrine-resistant breast cancer cells, we hypothesized COUP-TFII may play a part in the normal suppression of NFκB activity in endocrine-sensitive breast cancer cells by regulating the transcription of components of the NFκB pathway. Here we report for the first time that COUP-TFII, i.e., NR2F2 gene expression was inversely correlated with NFκB subunit genes NFKB2, REL, RELA, and RELB and NFκB target genes ICAM1, IL6, and TNFAIP3 in microarray data from 298 ERα+ breast tumors from patients treated with TAM for 5 years (Table 1). As NFκB is activated in endocrine-resistant cells, blockade of downstream NFκB target gene expression by COUP-TFII offers a possible mechanism by which COUP-TFII enables breast cancer cells to maintain endocrine sensitivity. Overall, these data point to the potential for evaluating COUP-TFII as a marker for breast tumors that may be sensitive to the combination of NFκB inhibitors with antiestrogen therapies, e.g. tamoxifen, to promote endocrine sensitivity and prevent disease progression. Tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα was purchased from PeproTech (Rocky Hill, NJ). Cell culture and transient transfectionMCF-7 breast cancer cells were purchased from ATCC and used at passage <10. Cell culture and transient transfectionMCF-7 breast cancer cells were purchased from ATCC and used at passage <10. Cells were transiently transfected as indicated in figure legends using FuGENE HD (Roche, Indianapolis, IN) as per the manufacturer’s protocol. Where indicated, cotransfection was performed with plasmids for CBP (kindly provided by Dr. Margarita Hadzopoulou-Cladaras (Dell and Hadzopoulou-Cladaras, 1999)), SRC-1 (kindly provided by Dr. Bert W. O’Malley (Lanz et al , 1999)), GRIP1/SRC-2, or ACTR/SRC-3 (kindly provided by Dr. Michael Stallcup (Koh et al , 2001)). Where indicated, cotransfection was performed with plasmids for CBP (kindly provided by Dr. Margarita Hadzopoulou-Cladaras (Dell and Hadzopoulou-Cladaras, 1999)), SRC-1 (kindly provided by Dr. Bert W. O’Malley (Lanz et al , 1999)), GRIP1/SRC-2, or ACTR/SRC-3 (kindly provided by Dr. Michael Stallcup (Koh et al , 2001)). Where indicated, cotransfection was performed with plasmids for CBP (kindly provided by Dr. Margarita Hadzopoulou-Cladaras (Dell and Hadzopoulou-Cladaras, 1999)), SRC-1 (kindly provided by Dr. Bert W. O’Malley (Lanz et al , 1999)), GRIP1/SRC-2, or ACTR/SRC-3 (kindly provided by Dr. Michael Stallcup (Koh et al , 2001)). Where indicated, cotransfection was performed with plasmids for CBP (kindly provided by Dr. Margarita Hadzopoulou-Cladaras (Dell and Hadzopoulou-Cladaras, 1999)), SRC-1 (kindly provided by Dr. Bert W. O’Malley (Lanz et al , 1999)), GRIP1/SRC-2, or ACTR/SRC-3 (kindly provided by Dr. Michael Stallcup (Koh et al , 2001)). Where indicated, cotransfection was performed with plasmids for CBP (kindly provided by Dr. Margarita Hadzopoulou-Cladaras (Dell and Hadzopoulou-Cladaras, 1999)), SRC-1 (kindly provided by Dr. Bert W. O’Malley (Lanz et al , 1999)), GRIP1/SRC-2, or ACTR/SRC-3 (kindly provided by Dr. Michael Stallcup (Koh et al , 2001)). Where indicated, cotransfection was performed with plasmids for CBP (kindly provided by Dr. Margarita Hadzopoulou-Cladaras (Dell and Hadzopoulou-Cladaras, 1999)), SRC-1 (kindly provided by Dr. Bert W. O’Malley (Lanz et al , 1999)), GRIP1/SRC-2, or ACTR/SRC-3 (kindly provided by Dr. Michael Stallcup (Koh et al , 2001)). The cytosolic extract was removed and the resulting nuclear pellet was resuspended in NE buffer (10 mM Tris HCl, 150 mM KCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.1% Triton-X 100, 12.5% glycerol, pH 7.9), 1 mM DTT, 1X protease and phosphatase inhibitor (Roche)), sonicated, and then sedimented by centrifugation with the resulting supernatant being the NE. Dynabeads protein A (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) were incubated with COUP-TFII antibody (Abcam, Cambridge, MA) or negative control IgG (Santa Cruz) for 30 min prior to the addition of 400 μg MCF-7 NE for 4 h at 4 °C with rotation. We analyzed this dataset to assess the correlation between COUP-TFII (NR2F2) expression and NFκB subunit (NFKB1, NFKB2, REL, RELA, RELB) and target gene (ICAM1, IL6, TNFAIP3) expression. We analyzed this dataset to assess the correlation between COUP-TFII (NR2F2) expression and NFκB subunit (NFKB1, NFKB2, REL, RELA, RELB) and target gene (ICAM1, IL6, TNFAIP3) expression. We analyzed this dataset to assess the correlation between COUP-TFII (NR2F2) expression and NFκB subunit (NFKB1, NFKB2, REL, RELA, RELB) and target gene (ICAM1, IL6, TNFAIP3) expression. We analyzed this dataset to assess the correlation between COUP-TFII (NR2F2) expression and NFκB subunit (NFKB1, NFKB2, REL, RELA, RELB) and target gene (ICAM1, IL6, TNFAIP3) expression. The mechanisms for acquired endocrine resistance are complex and a better understanding of maintenance of endocrine sensitivity is clearly needed. The mechanisms for acquired endocrine resistance are complex and a better understanding of maintenance of endocrine sensitivity is clearly needed. The mechanisms for acquired endocrine resistance are complex and a better understanding of maintenance of endocrine sensitivity is clearly needed. These data demonstrate that COUP-TFII suppresses NFκB activity in endocrine-resistant breast cancer cells. These data demonstrate that COUP-TFII suppresses NFκB activity in endocrine-resistant breast cancer cells. The expression of NFκB subunits NFKB2, REL, and RELB was higher in LCC9 compared to MCF-7 cells (Fig. 