Step 1 included the main effects of the covariates and Step 2 included the covariates with the interaction terms.Significant interaction terms and simple slopes were plotted using an automated spreadsheet (Dawson, 2014). Two, three-way interaction terms were created that included participant sex × contextual variable (e.g., parental monitoring) × the PRS (e.g., ADHD PRS). Step 1 included the main effects of the study variables considered in the previous regressions. Step 2 included three two-way interactions (participant sex × PRS; participant sex × contextual variable; PRS × contextual variable). Step 2 included three two-way interactions (participant sex × PRS; participant sex × contextual variable; PRS × contextual variable). 3.1.CD PRS ResultsThere was a main effect of participant sex such that males were more likely to meet diagnostic criteria for marijuana use disorders (top of Table 3). The CD PRS × community disadvantage interaction was associated with marijuana use disorders (Figure 1); however, the CD PRS × parental monitoring interaction was not (see Figure 2 in the supplementary materials). When exposed to higher community disadvantage, males with a higher CD PRS exhibited a greater log odds for a marijuana use disorder (B =.64, p =.017). Although higher phenotypic externalizing symptoms, such as CD and ADHD, are positively associated with and predictive of marijuana abuse and dependence (e.g., Bidwell et al , 2014; Grant et al , 2015), it is unclear whether such an association is also true for CD and ADHD polygenic genotypes. Although higher phenotypic externalizing symptoms, such as CD and ADHD, are positively associated with and predictive of marijuana abuse and dependence (e.g., Bidwell et al , 2014; Grant et al , 2015), it is unclear whether such an association is also true for CD and ADHD polygenic genotypes. This may be especially true in young adulthood, given that this developmental period is associated with increased independence and decreases in oversight by parents (Arnett, 2007). CD, ADHD, and marijuana use disorders may be a part of a larger externalizing syndrome, which is supported by work indicating strong, positive correlations between these conditions (Carragher et al , 2014; Harty et al , 2015; Korhonen et al , 2012; Krueger et al  2005; Miles et al , 2002). Whereas evidence of G x E interactions was found, the main effects of the CD and ADHD PRS on marijuana use disorders were not significant. The main effects of community disadvantage and parental monitoring on marijuana abuse and dependence were not significant. The main effects of community disadvantage and parental monitoring on marijuana abuse and dependence were not significant. The main effects of community disadvantage and parental monitoring on marijuana abuse and dependence were not significant. In total, eight sets of analyses were run. Moreover, there are several limitations of the current study to acknowledge. However, some work suggests that the allelic architecture for substance use disorders (i.e., alcohol dependence) is similar across European and African populations. DAD CD PRS Supplementary Material DAD CD PRS Supplementary Material DAD CD PRS Supplementary Material DAD CD PRS Supplementary Material DAD CD PRS Supplementary Material DAD CD PRS Supplementary Material DAD CD PRS Supplementary Material DAD CD PRS Supplementary Material An advantage of the molecular genetic approach is that such knowledge may shed light on neurobiological mechanisms underlying phenotypes. The consideration of polygenic influences that are associated with marijuana use disorders is consistent with substantial evidence that numerous genetic variants associated with psychiatric outcomes (i.e., CD and ADHD) likely influence liability for substance use problems (Hines et al , 2014). This may be particularly true among youth higher in CD symptoms who are more likely to be offered drugs, and less likely to refuse drugs upon being offered them (Burdzovic Andreas et al , 2016; Burdzovic Andreas and Pape, 2015; Rosenberg and Anthony, 2001). This may be particularly true among youth higher in CD symptoms who are more likely to be offered drugs, and less likely to refuse drugs upon being offered them (Burdzovic Andreas et al , 2016; Burdzovic Andreas and Pape, 2015; Rosenberg and Anthony, 2001). First, we examined whether externalizing disorders PRS (i.e., CD and ADHD) were associated with marijuana abuse and dependence among young adults. First, we examined whether externalizing disorders PRS (i.e., CD and ADHD) were associated with marijuana abuse and dependence among young adults. Three-thousand and one-hundred and nine individuals were available for recruitment in first grade. Participant demographic information for the analytic sample is outlined in Table 1.With respect to differences in first grade demographic characteristics between the analytic sample and those African Americans not assessed at age 20 and/or those who did not provide DNA, the only significant difference (p ≤ .05) was that the analytic sample had a significantly greater proportion of females than the whole sample. This is a source of concern given that about a third of people who use marijuana will develop a marijuana use disorder (Hasin et al , 2015). This is a source of concern given that about a third of people who use marijuana will develop a marijuana use disorder (Hasin et al , 2015). The rationale for the choice of sixth grade as the point in development to assess community disadvantage was that it preceded the onset of marijuana use and disorder for the entire sample and was concurrent with the first opportunities to use marijuana. The rationale for the choice of sixth grade as the point in development to assess community disadvantage was that it preceded the onset of marijuana use and disorder for the entire sample and was concurrent with the first opportunities to use marijuana. The rationale for the choice of sixth grade as the point in development to assess community disadvantage was that it preceded the onset of marijuana use and disorder for the entire sample and was concurrent with the first opportunities to use marijuana. The rationale for the choice of sixth grade as the point in development to assess community disadvantage was that it preceded the onset of marijuana use and disorder for the entire sample and was concurrent with the first opportunities to use marijuana. The items used to create the index include the percentages of (a) adults 25 years or older with a college degree, (b) owner-occupied housing, (c) households with incomes below the federal poverty threshold, and (d) female-headed households with children. The participants included in the GWA met diagnostic criteria for alcohol dependence. Two externalizing disorders that have been predictive of marijuana use disorders are conduct disorder (CD), defined as a consistent pattern of antisocial and disruptive behaviors that often violate social norms, and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), a syndrome characterized by marked inattention, impulsivity, and hyperactivity (American Psychiatric Association, 2000; Bidwell et al , 2014; Fergusson & Boden, 2008; Grant et al , 2015). Two externalizing disorders that have been predictive of marijuana use disorders are conduct disorder (CD), defined as a consistent pattern of antisocial and disruptive behaviors that often violate social norms, and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), a syndrome characterized by marked inattention, impulsivity, and hyperactivity (American Psychiatric Association, 2000; Bidwell et al , 2014; Fergusson & Boden, 2008; Grant et al , 2015). Two externalizing disorders that have been predictive of marijuana use disorders are conduct disorder (CD), defined as a consistent pattern of antisocial and disruptive behaviors that often violate social norms, and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), a syndrome characterized by marked inattention, impulsivity, and hyperactivity (American Psychiatric Association, 2000; Bidwell et al , 2014; Fergusson & Boden, 2008; Grant et al , 2015). Two externalizing disorders that have been predictive of marijuana use disorders are conduct disorder (CD), defined as a consistent pattern of antisocial and disruptive behaviors that often violate social norms, and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), a syndrome characterized by marked inattention, impulsivity, and hyperactivity (American Psychiatric Association, 2000; Bidwell et al , 2014; Fergusson & Boden, 2008; Grant et al , 2015). Two externalizing disorders that have been predictive of marijuana use disorders are conduct disorder (CD), defined as a consistent pattern of antisocial and disruptive behaviors that often violate social norms, and attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), a syndrome characterized by marked inattention, impulsivity, and hyperactivity (American Psychiatric Association, 2000; Bidwell et al , 2014; Fergusson & Boden, 2008; Grant et al , 2015). This process uses an orthogonal transformation to reduce the multi-dimensional genome-wide SNP data into a smaller number of principal components. We used all the available measured SNPs (roughly 900,000) to generate these components. The z-scored residuals from these regressions are the continuous ancestry-adjusted (or corrected) scores we used in the primary analyses. 