In total, SIEVE quantified 900 unique glycosite-containing peptides from 497 unique glycoproteins with 1% FDR (Supporting Information Table 2). In total, SIEVE quantified 900 unique glycosite-containing peptides from 497 unique glycoproteins with 1% FDR (Supporting Information Table 2). In total, SIEVE quantified 900 unique glycosite-containing peptides from 497 unique glycoproteins with 1% FDR (Supporting Information Table 2). In total, SIEVE quantified 900 unique glycosite-containing peptides from 497 unique glycoproteins with 1% FDR (Supporting Information Table 2). It is estimated that latently infected cells persist in the host with half-lives of 44 months resulting in an estimation of 60–70 years for HAART to cure HIV infection [7,8]. The difference could be due to HIV latency and/or years of passages of the cell lines. HIV has evolved a surprisingly sophisticated mechanism for dormancy in the host cells. Our SPEG method substantially reduces the complexity of sample that allows identification of low abundant but biologically relevant glycosite-containing peptides [38]. To identify, isolate and target the rare latently infected cells in vivo, identifying glycosylated biomarkers of the cells is meritorious. To identify, isolate and target the rare latently infected cells in vivo, identifying glycosylated biomarkers of the cells is meritorious. These steps were essential and showed the reproducible data generated in this study. Pathway analysis suggests that the reactivated cells might have an altered behaviour in cell migration, response to wounding and immune response. 4.1 ConclusionOur data show changes of glycoproteins in an established HIV latently infected cell line model (ACH-2 and A3.01 cell lines). Analysis revealed that the profile of glycoproteins was significantly changed between ACH-2 and A3.01 cells. Analysis revealed that the profile of glycoproteins was significantly changed between ACH-2 and A3.01 cells. Analysis revealed that the profile of glycoproteins was significantly changed between ACH-2 and A3.01 cells. Analysis revealed that the profile of glycoproteins was significantly changed between ACH-2 and A3.01 cells. Cell migration, response to wounding and immune response might be associated with changed glycoproteins suggesting the cells with reactivated latency might have changed cell biology. This is because, in part, that CTL is compromised in most HIV+ individuals and thus restimulation of broad CTL response is required to clear latent HIV-1 [6]. It is not clear whether the stimulated CTL response is long-lasting and broad-reacting enough to clear all latent reservoirs. The changed secretion of glycoproteins from latently infected cells indicates that cellular glycoproteome may also change. The changed secretion of glycoproteins from latently infected cells indicates that cellular glycoproteome may also change. The changed secretion of glycoproteins from latently infected cells indicates that cellular glycoproteome may also change. The glycosite-containing peptides were subjected to label-free quantitative nano-LC-MS/MS analysis [18, 19]. Lifelong therapy will require a significant amount of financial support for drugs and public health management and providing lifelong therapy to the large infected population may emerge as a challenge [2]. 2.1 ChemicalsSodium periodate and hydrazide beads were purchased from Bio-Rad (Hercules, CA); bicinchoninic acid protein assay (BCA) assay kit was purchased from Pierce (Rockford, IL); sequencing-grade trypsin was from Promega (Madison, WI); Sep-Pak C18 1cc Vac Cartridge was from Waters (Milford, MA); PNGase F was from New England Biolabs (Ipswich, MA); Other chemicals such as urea, ammonia bicarbonate (AB), ACN, TFA, tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), iodoacetamide, 5 M NaCl, sodium sulphite and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). 2.1 ChemicalsSodium periodate and hydrazide beads were purchased from Bio-Rad (Hercules, CA); bicinchoninic acid protein assay (BCA) assay kit was purchased from Pierce (Rockford, IL); sequencing-grade trypsin was from Promega (Madison, WI); Sep-Pak C18 1cc Vac Cartridge was from Waters (Milford, MA); PNGase F was from New England Biolabs (Ipswich, MA); Other chemicals such as urea, ammonia bicarbonate (AB), ACN, TFA, tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), iodoacetamide, 5 M NaCl, sodium sulphite and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). 2.1 ChemicalsSodium periodate and hydrazide beads were purchased from Bio-Rad (Hercules, CA); bicinchoninic acid protein assay (BCA) assay kit was purchased from Pierce (Rockford, IL); sequencing-grade trypsin was from Promega (Madison, WI); Sep-Pak C18 1cc Vac Cartridge was from Waters (Milford, MA); PNGase F was from New England Biolabs (Ipswich, MA); Other chemicals such as urea, ammonia bicarbonate (AB), ACN, TFA, tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), iodoacetamide, 5 M NaCl, sodium sulphite and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). 2.1 ChemicalsSodium periodate and hydrazide beads were purchased from Bio-Rad (Hercules, CA); bicinchoninic acid protein assay (BCA) assay kit was purchased from Pierce (Rockford, IL); sequencing-grade trypsin was from Promega (Madison, WI); Sep-Pak C18 1cc Vac Cartridge was from Waters (Milford, MA); PNGase F was from New England Biolabs (Ipswich, MA); Other chemicals such as urea, ammonia bicarbonate (AB), ACN, TFA, tris (2-carboxyethyl) phosphine (TCEP), iodoacetamide, 5 M NaCl, sodium sulphite and phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). The membrane was blocked by 5% nonfat milk, 0.1% TBS-Tween 20 at room temperature for 2 h. Then membrane was probed with anti-HIV-1 gp120 antibody (1:2000, abcam) or anti-HIV-1 p24 antibody (1:2000, biotin, abcam) at 4°C overnight, followed by three 15-min washes of 0.1% TBS-Tween 20. The membrane was blocked by 5% nonfat milk, 0.1% TBS-Tween 20 at room temperature for 2 h. Then membrane was probed with anti-HIV-1 gp120 antibody (1:2000, abcam) or anti-HIV-1 p24 antibody (1:2000, biotin, abcam) at 4°C overnight, followed by three 15-min washes of 0.1% TBS-Tween 20. Horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody anti-goat or biotin (Thermo Scientific) were added at 1:2000 dilution, followed by a 1-h incubation at room temperature. After three washes with 0.1% TBS-Tween 20, the signals were visualized by SuperSignal West Femto maximum sensitivity substrate (Thermo Scientific). After digestion, 5 µL of sample was resolved on a tricine gel and silver staining was used to determine the completion of tryptic digested peptides. Sodium sulphite was added at a final concentration of 60 mM to quench the oxidation reaction. MS analysis was performed using an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). 2.6 Protein identification and quantificationProteins were identified using SEQUEST in Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, version 1.4). The precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance at 0.06 Da. During latency, the provirus is transcriptionally silent with little or no viral protein expressed [5]. During latency, the provirus is transcriptionally silent with little or no viral protein expressed [5]. After framing, the Proteome Discoverer result files were imported with a 1% FDR. The integrated intensity (peak area) of glycosite-containing peptides was calculated and normalized by the median of each sample and used to calculate a p-value. Consequently, the immune system fails to recognize and eliminate the latently infected cells in the human body [5, 6]. Consequently, the immune system fails to recognize and eliminate the latently infected cells in the human body [5, 6]. Consequently, the immune system fails to recognize and eliminate the latently infected cells in the human body [5, 6]. Hierarchical clustering was used to cluster the samples and analysis based on normalized intensity of glycosite-containing peptides using QCanvas version 1.2 [29]. 