Similar analysis was extended to 68 G2 mice from such breedings (summarized in Fig. Among these, 14/18 had complete LSL excision, but 4/18 lacked excision. Germ line insertions are defined as retrotransposition events that occur in germ cells of an animal containing an activated allele of the ORFeusLSL transgene. For example, to be used as an efficient insertional mutagen in mice, a transposon is usually equipped with a gene trapping cassette so that, after transposition, the endogenous transcriptional unit where the transposed copy is inserted will be rendered inactive and the site of integration can be easily identified by the transposon tag (Carlson and Largaespada, 2005). For example, to be used as an efficient insertional mutagen in mice, a transposon is usually equipped with a gene trapping cassette so that, after transposition, the endogenous transcriptional unit where the transposed copy is inserted will be rendered inactive and the site of integration can be easily identified by the transposon tag (Carlson and Largaespada, 2005). For example, to be used as an efficient insertional mutagen in mice, a transposon is usually equipped with a gene trapping cassette so that, after transposition, the endogenous transcriptional unit where the transposed copy is inserted will be rendered inactive and the site of integration can be easily identified by the transposon tag (Carlson and Largaespada, 2005). 4b, animals H866, H868, H869, H871, and H872), and 9% (7/78) had insertion signals by intron PCR (Fig. All previous efforts on making L1 transgenics used standard transgenesis (An et al , 2006; Babushok et al , 2006; Muotri et al , 2005; Ostertag et al , 2002; Prak et al , 2003), which normally results in a multicopy concatemer of donor transgenes (Palmiter and Brinster, 1986). In fact, we have observed an unusually high rate of embryonic lethality and failure to produce by surrogate mothers during microinjection of ORFeus transgenes equipped with gene-trapping cassettes (W. An, E. Davis, K. O’Donnell, M. Davisson, M. Wiles, J. Kulik, J. Boeke, unpublished data). In fact, we have observed an unusually high rate of embryonic lethality and failure to produce by surrogate mothers during microinjection of ORFeus transgenes equipped with gene-trapping cassettes (W. An, E. Davis, K. O’Donnell, M. Davisson, M. Wiles, J. Kulik, J. Boeke, unpublished data). In fact, we have observed an unusually high rate of embryonic lethality and failure to produce by surrogate mothers during microinjection of ORFeus transgenes equipped with gene-trapping cassettes (W. An, E. Davis, K. O’Donnell, M. Davisson, M. Wiles, J. Kulik, J. Boeke, unpublished data). A plausible explanation for the high activity of the single-copy line is that the ORFeusLSL transgene was integrated at a highly active genomic locus as the result of lacZ screening in ES cells. In this regard, a direct comparison of single-copy and multi-copy ORFeus transgenes at identical genomic loci would be highly desirable. The efficiency of Cre-mediated recombination is affected by several factors other than the promoter driving Cre expression (Sauer, 1998; Schmidt-Supprian and Rajewsky, 2007). Even if an active line is established after extensive screening, it will be genetically unstable, and difficult to maintain due to ongoing retrotransposition. Even if an active line is established after extensive screening, it will be genetically unstable, and difficult to maintain due to ongoing retrotransposition. We also observed mosaic excision of ORFeusLSL transgene using a separate Cre-expressing mouse line under the regulation of human CMV minimal promoter (CMVmini-cre (Schwenk et al , 1995); not shown). We also observed mosaic excision of ORFeusLSL transgene using a separate Cre-expressing mouse line under the regulation of human CMV minimal promoter (CMVmini-cre (Schwenk et al , 1995); not shown). We also observed mosaic excision of ORFeusLSL transgene using a separate Cre-expressing mouse line under the regulation of human CMV minimal promoter (CMVmini-cre (Schwenk et al , 1995); not shown). Therefore, we set out to test CAG-cre and CMVmini-cre mouse lines on two independent ORFeusLSL target lines (2G6 and 1E2) that had identical transgene sequence at different genomic loci (Fig. The seemingly identical results obtained from such experiments favor an alternative explanation, i.e. The seemingly identical results obtained from such experiments favor an alternative explanation, i.e. Thus, our data are consistent with inefficient excision by Cre recombinase on more distantly positioned loxP sites. Thus, our data are consistent with inefficient excision by Cre recombinase on more distantly positioned loxP sites. On a different note, our study presents potential evidence that adds to the increasing literature for Cre-induced toxicity (Schmidt-Supprian and Rajewsky, 2007). Such toxicity may explain the apparently low prevalence of CAG-cre transgene among G1 progeny of heterozygous CAG-cre male parents derived from two independent ORFeusLSL lines:10/38 for line 2G6 (Fig. Such toxicity may explain the apparently low prevalence of CAG-cre transgene among G1 progeny of heterozygous CAG-cre male parents derived from two independent ORFeusLSL lines:10/38 for line 2G6 (Fig. Such toxicity may explain the apparently low prevalence of CAG-cre transgene among G1 progeny of heterozygous CAG-cre male parents derived from two independent ORFeusLSL lines:10/38 for line 2G6 (Fig. Such toxicity may explain the apparently low prevalence of CAG-cre transgene among G1 progeny of heterozygous CAG-cre male parents derived from two independent ORFeusLSL lines:10/38 for line 2G6 (Fig. Such toxicity may explain the apparently low prevalence of CAG-cre transgene among G1 progeny of heterozygous CAG-cre male parents derived from two independent ORFeusLSL lines:10/38 for line 2G6 (Fig. Nevertheless, it is noteworthy that the paternal genome may be more susceptible to Cre-mediated actions than the maternal counterpart as paternal DNA is uniquely remodeled from a nucleosome-based to a protamine-based chromatin during spermatogenesis (Kimmins and Sassone-Corsi, 2005). Nevertheless, it is noteworthy that the paternal genome may be more susceptible to Cre-mediated actions than the maternal counterpart as paternal DNA is uniquely remodeled from a nucleosome-based to a protamine-based chromatin during spermatogenesis (Kimmins and Sassone-Corsi, 2005). The underlying mechanism for cis preference is not fully understood but L1 proteins are found to colocalize with the encoding L1 RNA in cytoplasmic ribonucleoprotein particles, which are proposed retrotransposition intermediates (Boeke, 1997; Hohjoh and Singer, 1996; Kulpa and Moran, 2005, 2006; Martin, 1991). The underlying mechanism for cis preference is not fully understood but L1 proteins are found to colocalize with the encoding L1 RNA in cytoplasmic ribonucleoprotein particles, which are proposed retrotransposition intermediates (Boeke, 1997; Hohjoh and Singer, 1996; Kulpa and Moran, 2005, 2006; Martin, 1991). To make pBSsmL1glob, the β-globin polyadenylation signal was PCR amplified from the plasmid pQX107, digested with BamHI/EcoRI, and cloned into the corresponding sites of pBSsmL1 to produce pBSsmL1glob. The CAG promoter and LSL cassette from pQX107 was removed with NotI/XmnI, blunted with Klenow fragment, and cloned into the BstZ17I sites of pBSsmL1GFPuv to make ORFeusLSL, which was sequencingly verified in its entirety. Three independent ES clones with single copy trans-genes and high levels of lacZ expression were selected from 3500 ES cell clones and injected into BALB/c blastocysts, and the resulting chimeric males were mated to C57BL/6J females. To this end, we incorporated the Z/AP design (Lobe et al , 1999) by grafting the loxP-β-geo-stop-loxP (LSL) cassette described for that transgene between the CAG promoter (Niwa et al , 1991) and ORFeus coding sequences (Han and Boeke, 2004); this construct is termed ORFeusLSL (Fig. Quantitative RT-PCR suggested in-significant β-geo transcript variation among the three cell lines. Quantitative RT-PCR suggested in-significant β-geo transcript variation among the three cell lines. 1a, primers 4 and 6). 1b) should generate a 1,370-bp band, whereas ORFeus retrotranspositions (Fig. L1 replicates in the genome by retrotransposition, a copy-and-paste mechanism involving reverse transcription of an RNA intermediate. For doubly heterozygous G1 progeny of CAG-cre females, 5/12 displayed complete excision in the tail tissue examined (Fig. 2b, animals H784 and H883), 5/12 displayed a mosaic excision pattern, indicated by the presence of both floxed and excised alleles in the same tissue (Fig. Hence, the observed excision rate in doubly heterozygous G1 progeny was also much lower than that in the initial study which reported excision in 100% of such animals without mosaicism (Sakai and Miyazaki, 1997). Similar results were obtained from reciprocal crosses between CAG-cre and a different ORFeusLSL mouse line (line 1E2) (Fig. Similar results were obtained from reciprocal crosses between CAG-cre and a different ORFeusLSL mouse line (line 1E2) (Fig. Similar results were obtained from reciprocal crosses between CAG-cre and a different ORFeusLSL mouse line (line 1E2) (Fig. Similar results were obtained from reciprocal crosses between CAG-cre and a different ORFeusLSL mouse line (line 1E2) (Fig. With intron PCR, we detected intronless signal in the tail tissue of all animals that have undergone either complete (Fig. Native human L1 isolates are more active in such assays as compared to native mouse L1s (Goodier et al , 2001; Naas et al , 1998), but a synonymously recoded, synthetic mouse L1 (termed ORFeus) is the most active L1 so far reported (Han and Boeke, 2004). Native human L1 isolates are more active in such assays as compared to native mouse L1s (Goodier et al , 2001; Naas et al , 1998), but a synonymously recoded, synthetic mouse L1 (termed ORFeus) is the most active L1 so far reported (Han and Boeke, 2004). As expected, Cre-mediated excision could be detected in 3/3 pancreatic samples, 3/3 stomach samples, 2/3 duodenal samples, but none of several other tissues examined (Fig. Only the 1,370-bp intron-containing signal was detected in all tissues using the standard assay (not shown). To enhance detection sensitivity for retrotransposition events, we devised a seminested PCR strategy in which the intron-flanking PCR product was diluted and amplified in a subsequent PCR (with primers 4 and 5 as in Fig. To enhance detection sensitivity for retrotransposition events, we devised a seminested PCR strategy in which the intron-flanking PCR product was diluted and amplified in a subsequent PCR (with primers 4 and 5 as in Fig. To enhance detection sensitivity for retrotransposition events, we devised a seminested PCR strategy in which the intron-flanking PCR product was diluted and amplified in a subsequent PCR (with primers 4 and 5 as in Fig. To enhance detection sensitivity for retrotransposition events, we devised a seminested PCR strategy in which the intron-flanking PCR product was diluted and amplified in a subsequent PCR (with primers 4 and 5 as in Fig. To enhance detection sensitivity for retrotransposition events, we devised a seminested PCR strategy in which the intron-flanking PCR product was diluted and amplified in a subsequent PCR (with primers 4 and 5 as in Fig. Retrotransposition signals were detected in 3/3 pancreatic samples, 1/3 stomach and 1/3 duodenal samples but not in any other tissues examined (Fig. Thus L1 machinery is intact in somatic cells in which L1 is not normally expressed. 