Each volunteer provided written informed consent before study enrolment, and the study was registered in the clinicaltrials.- gov database (identifier NCT00661674).All study sessions were conducted by a blinded research assistant (N.D.) and supervised by an unblinded physician (L.C.) who administered the study medication and monitored heart rate, blood pressure, and arterial oxygenation throughout the study. Ondansetron (Bedford Laboratories, Bedford, Ohio, USA) 8 mg or placebo (0.9% saline solution, Hospira Inc., Lake Forest, Illinois, USA) was administered in a double-blinded manner as an i.v. Thirty minutes later, morphine (Baxter Healthcare Corporation, Deerfield, Illinois, USA) 10 mg/70 kg was administered over 10 min. morphine administration, 10 mg/70 kg naloxone (Hospira Inc.) was administered to the volunteer as an i.v. morphine administration, 10 mg/70 kg naloxone (Hospira Inc.) was administered to the volunteer as an i.v. Animal behavioral data were analyzed using one- or two-way analysis of variance with post-hoc Tukey testing or, for CPP data with t-testing. Animal behavioral data were analyzed using one- or two-way analysis of variance with post-hoc Tukey testing or, for CPP data with t-testing. Animal behavioral data were analyzed using one- or two-way analysis of variance with post-hoc Tukey testing or, for CPP data with t-testing. Animal behavioral data were analyzed using one- or two-way analysis of variance with post-hoc Tukey testing or, for CPP data with t-testing. Analyses were performed with SAS 9.1 statistical package (Cary, Illinois, USA) with P value of less than 0.05 considered statistically significant. Analyses were performed with SAS 9.1 statistical package (Cary, Illinois, USA) with P value of less than 0.05 considered statistically significant. Analyses were performed with SAS 9.1 statistical package (Cary, Illinois, USA) with P value of less than 0.05 considered statistically significant. One dimension of addiction is physical dependence, which can be modeled in rodents. The distribution of the naloxone-induced withdrawal behavior was compared with the pattern of genetic variation across the 18 strains analyzed. There are seven haplotype blocks covering this gene though the dependence-associated blocks account for the majority of SNPs. We next investigated whether 5-HT3 receptors expressed within the CNS were capable of altering the severity of withdrawal. We next investigated whether 5-HT3 receptors expressed within the CNS were capable of altering the severity of withdrawal. We chose to measure sensitization to a mechanical stimulus as this provides a robust degree of sensitization [14]. Taken together, these experiments show that a 5-HT3 receptor antagonist markedly reduced the severity of two distinct measures of physical dependence on morphine.On account of the positive findings with respect to 5-HT3 blockade and reduction in signs of physical dependence, we extended our testing to a paradigm probing the reinforcing properties of opioid administration by using CPP. Furthermore, none of the SNPs within either Htr3a-associated haplotype blocks altered its predicted amino acid sequence. Furthermore, none of the SNPs within either Htr3a-associated haplotype blocks altered its predicted amino acid sequence. Furthermore, none of the SNPs within either Htr3a-associated haplotype blocks altered its predicted amino acid sequence. Many SNPs were located within 3′ and 5′ regulatory regions, suggesting that they may alter mRNA transcription or stability. Many SNPs were located within 3′ and 5′ regulatory regions, suggesting that they may alter mRNA transcription or stability. Many SNPs were located within 3′ and 5′ regulatory regions, suggesting that they may alter mRNA transcription or stability. The amygdala [38,39], dorsal raphe [38,40], and periaqueductal gray [41] are brainstem nuclei and are known to modulate signs of opioid dependence and withdrawal. The amygdala [38,39], dorsal raphe [38,40], and periaqueductal gray [41] are brainstem nuclei and are known to modulate signs of opioid dependence and withdrawal. Ondansetron pretreatment caused a substantial (76.4%±22.6) and statistically significant (P=0.0313) decrease in mean OOWS score (Fig. Alterations in brainstem 5-HT3 protein followed the same pattern. Alterations in brainstem 5-HT3 protein followed the same pattern. Alterations in brainstem 5-HT3 protein followed the same pattern. Alterations in brainstem 5-HT3 protein followed the same pattern. On the basis of these results, a widely used antiemetic drug (ondansetron) was tested in human volunteers, and these 5-HT3 receptor antagonists were shown to significantly reduce the objective signs of morphine withdrawal in humans. 5-HT3 receptors are transmitter-gated, cation selective ion channels that mediate neuronal depolarization and neurotransmitter release in both the CNS and peripheral nervous system. 5-HT3 receptors are transmitter-gated, cation selective ion channels that mediate neuronal depolarization and neurotransmitter release in both the CNS and peripheral nervous system. This receptor is targeted by antiemetic drugs during chemotherapy and anesthesia, and is also considered a potential target for treatment of gastrointestinal disorders, anxiety, and pain [32]. 5-HT3 receptors modulate the activity of the mesolimbic system, which are heavily implicated in addiction to multiple substances [45]. 5-HT3 receptors modulate the activity of the mesolimbic system, which are heavily implicated in addiction to multiple substances [45]. AnimalsAll animal experiments were conducted using protocols approved by our Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. The role of the amygdala in modulating opioid withdrawal is of particular interest; this was one of the nuclei showing prominent opioid modulation of Htr3a expression in our studies. Although not tested for opioids specifically, ondansetron microinjection into the mouse amygdala (and dorsal raphe) blocked an aversive behavior (light/dark exploration) exhibited by rodents during withdrawal from nicotine, cocaine, benzodiazepines, and ethanol [38]. More recently four naturally occurring variants of the human Htr3b gene were found to alter the expression and function of heteromeric 5-HT3A/B receptors [63]. More recently four naturally occurring variants of the human Htr3b gene were found to alter the expression and function of heteromeric 5-HT3A/B receptors [63]. Many gene association studies linking variants of these genes with depression, bipolar affective disorder, nausea, and other phenotypes are available. One functional variant of the Htr3b gene has particularly strong linkage to depression in women and nausea after antidepressant administration [64,65]. Opioid addiction is a complex syndrome involving a maladaptive pattern of drug use that is characterized by tolerance, physical dependence (withdrawal during abstinence), continued drug use despite acknowledged harm from the drug, excessive preoccupation with use of the drug, and social isolation. Naloxone (Sigma Chemical) 10 mg/kg was injected s.c. in 50 μl of NaCl as described previously by our laboratory and others [8,9]. For systemic administration, ondansetron was injected s.c. in 100 μl volumes of 0.9% NaCl to some groups of mice. When no response was obtained the next stiffest fiber in the series was applied to the same paw; if a response was obtained a less stiff fiber was applied. Any mouse that spent more than 75% of the time in either of the association compartments was excluded. On Days 2, 4, and 6, the Mice received saline injections and were placed in the alternative compartment after 25 min. On Day 7, mice were placed in the middle neutral compartment of the place preference apparatus with full access to the other two compartments and assessed for the length of time spent in each compartment (postconditioning report). This analysis identifies haplotype blocks in which the haplotypic strain grouping within a block correlates with the distribution of phenotypic data among the inbred strains analyzed. As many as 90% of patients in chronic pain management settings receive opioid pain relievers, and the prevalence of drug abuse is 9−41% among these patients [4]. The phenotypic data were evaluated using the average value for each strain, obtained by assessing eight mice per strain. The haplotype blocks are then ranked based upon the calculated P value. From this analysis, the candidate haplotype blocks empirically selected for further analysis had the best P values. Dissected tissue was then quick frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C until use. Anxiety, increased pain sensitivity, poor concentration, tachycardia and flu-like symptoms develop during opioid withdrawal, a syndrome reflecting physical dependence on these drugs [5]. Incubation was then carried out at 42°C for 60 min followed by heat inactivation at 70°C. Briefly, 2 μl of a mixture of 2x Sybr Green and primers were loaded with 2 μl diluted cDNA template in each well. Melting curves were performed to document single product formation, and agarose electrophoresis confirmed appropriate product size. Melting curves were performed to document single product formation, and agarose electrophoresis confirmed appropriate product size. Mice underwent intracardiac perfusion with 10 cm3 ice-cold 0.9% NaCl after CO2 asphyxiation followed by brain harvest. Mice underwent intracardiac perfusion with 10 cm3 ice-cold 0.9% NaCl after CO2 asphyxiation followed by brain harvest. Mice underwent intracardiac perfusion with 10 cm3 ice-cold 0.9% NaCl after CO2 asphyxiation followed by brain harvest. The slides were then brought directly to the PixCell LCM instrument (Arcturus, Mountain View, California, USA), with a 15-μm laser spot diameter, power of 40 mW and 500-μs pulse duration to transfer tissue to the CapSure matrix (Arcturus). Each cap was used until 80−90% of the surface contained transferred tissue. Test sessions for each individual volunteer were separated by at least 7 days. Test sessions for each individual volunteer were separated by at least 7 days. 