Compared to dialysis, kidney transplantation is associated with higher quality of life, lower mortality, and lower healthcare expenditures (1, 2). Compared to dialysis, kidney transplantation is associated with higher quality of life, lower mortality, and lower healthcare expenditures (1, 2). Our findings highlight the multifactorial nature of renal transplant disparities (36, 37). Our findings highlight the multifactorial nature of renal transplant disparities (36, 37). Such research could lead to the development of interventions at the level of individuals or groups (e.g., race-specific marketing or education campaigns nationally or within regions), or at the level of ESRD Network or UNOS region (e.g., UNOS policies and training, interventions with providers or transplant centers to reduce disparities in these geographic areas). Second, our study was observational and thus may be subject to ecological fallacy, that is, drawing conclusions for individuals based on group level data (45). Third, data on comorbid conditions were subject to the limitations of the medical evidence form – limited sensitivity for certain conditions, lack of information on disease severity – and was collected at dialysis initiation while our outcome was measured over time (46). An additional limitation is that we did not fully explore the role of preemptive waitlisting on regional or racial disparities. Prior work shows significant variation in waitlist rates at these levels, and some of the variation that occurs at a regional level may be the aggregation of micro-level processes at work, for example, neighborhood or center-level factors (14, 15, 21, 22, 35). African Americans and whites have disparate distribution among UNOS regions; therefore, we sought to determine whether regional disparities are an underappreciated cause of racial disparities or if racial disparities within regions contribute to regional disparities. We included all non-Hispanic whites and African Americans aged 18–70 with first ESRD service between January 2003 and September 2009. We included all non-Hispanic whites and African Americans aged 18–70 with first ESRD service between January 2003 and September 2009. In addition, in an exploratory analysis, preemptively waitlisted patients over the same time period were added to the cohort to explore the impact of preemptive waitlisting on racial and regional disparities.Several data sources were used for this analysis. Socio-demographic and clinical information from dialysis initiation was gathered from the USRDS medical evidence form. Socio-demographic and clinical information from dialysis initiation was gathered from the USRDS medical evidence form. We censored patients at the time of living donor transplant, death, and the end of the observation period, June 30, 2010. This information was available through September 2010. We calculated the 25th percentile for days to transplant listing for African Americans and whites, overall and by region. We calculated the 25th percentile for days to transplant listing for African Americans and whites, overall and by region. We calculated the 25th percentile for days to transplant listing for African Americans and whites, overall and by region. We calculated the 25th percentile for days to transplant listing for African Americans and whites, overall and by region. Finally, we compared African American– white disparities within region. Finally, we compared African American– white disparities within region. Finally, we compared African American– white disparities within region. In addition, to examine the relative importance of race versus region in racial disparities, we examined the C statistics for predictive power for survival models and a random sample of observations after controlling for UNOS region only, race only, or UNOS region and race interaction terms. In addition, to examine the relative importance of race versus region in racial disparities, we examined the C statistics for predictive power for survival models and a random sample of observations after controlling for UNOS region only, race only, or UNOS region and race interaction terms. In addition, to examine the relative importance of race versus region in racial disparities, we examined the C statistics for predictive power for survival models and a random sample of observations after controlling for UNOS region only, race only, or UNOS region and race interaction terms. The higher C statistic indicates a more predictive model. Geographic variation has been examined as a factor contributing to access to kidney transplantation (13–19). They were also more likely to be unemployed (35% vs. 20%), uninsured (16% vs. 8%), or have Medicaid (35% vs. 22%) at dialysis initiation (all p < 0.001).United Network for Organ Sharing regions varied in their ESRD populations. Similarly, across all regions, whites were significantly more likely than African Americans to be preemptively waitlisted (3.5% vs. 10.5%, p < 0.05, results not shown). Similarly, across all regions, whites were significantly more likely than African Americans to be preemptively waitlisted (3.5% vs. 10.5%, p < 0.05, results not shown). Similarly, across all regions, whites were significantly more likely than African Americans to be preemptively waitlisted (3.5% vs. 10.5%, p < 0.05, results not shown). Bivariate comparison between UNOS region, race, and days to transplant waitlistUnadjusted differences by UNOS region and race in days to listing (25th percentile) are shown in Table 2 (and Fig. Only in Region 3 were whites’ days to waitlist significantly greater than the US average. Only in Region 3 were whites’ days to waitlist significantly greater than the US average. Only in Region 3 were whites’ days to waitlist significantly greater than the US average. Only in Region 3 were whites’ days to waitlist significantly greater than the US average. Multivariable association between UNOS region, race, and renal transplant waitlistOverall, the adjusted likelihood (hazard) of transplant listing varied significantly by region (Table 3, Column 1). In addition, we examined C statistics to compare models when controlling only for region, only for race, and for race/region interaction. The C statistic was higher for the model with race/region interaction which indicates a better model fit.In Regions 3 and 4, two regions with a large regional disparity overall (HR 0.76 and 0.82 compared to US average, respectively), the overall regional disparity in time to transplant waitlist is driven by the racial disparity. These regions, 3 and 4 together, comprise a disproportionate share of the African American population in the US overall (39% compared to 22% for whites, p < 0.05). Racial disparities by region in access to transplant waitlist are likely due to both socioeconomic disparities by race as well as transplant-specific factors. 