Time-lapse images were acquired every 30 seconds for 3 hours with a Zeiss Axiovert 405M microscope using a 100× oil-immersion objective. Ascending dorsal column sensory axons retract extensively following spinal cord injuryWe hypothesized that the infiltration of activated macrophages could play a direct role in axonal retraction. The dorsal columns of adult female Sprague-Dawley rats were crushed at the level of C8 and a population of injured sensory neurons was traced over a period of two days via dextran-Texas Red labeling of the sciatic nerve. Spinal cord tissue was harvested at 2, 4, 7, 14, and 28 days post-lesion and the distances between the ends of the labeled fibers and the center of the lesions were measured (Fig. In order to further implicate macrophages in axonal retraction in vivo we treated animals with clodronate liposomes in order to deplete circulating monocytes/macrophages (van Rooijen et al , 1997; Popovich et al , 1999). We focused our attention on the interactions between adult sensory neuron axons and macrophages in an in vitro model of the glial scar where dystrophic endbulbs form at the tips of the regenerating adult sensory axons as their forward growth stalls for extended periods (but, importantly, they do not tend to retract) on a substrate consisting of opposing gradients of the growth-promoting protein laminin and the inhibitory proteoglycan aggrecan (Tom et al , 2004; Longbrake et al , 2007). Following a 30 minute period of baseline observation, NR8383 macrophages, which are intrinsically active, were added to the cultures and their interactions with dystrophic axons monitored. Therefore, the mere presence of macrophages or their secreted factors in the vicinity of axons were not capable of inducing axonal retraction in the absence of physical interactions with dystrophic axons. This particular population of macrophages has been shown to retain the phenotypic, morphological and functional characteristics of macrophages found in spinal cord lesions unlike populations harvested from other bodily sources (Longbrake et al , 2007). This particular population of macrophages has been shown to retain the phenotypic, morphological and functional characteristics of macrophages found in spinal cord lesions unlike populations harvested from other bodily sources (Longbrake et al , 2007). This particular population of macrophages has been shown to retain the phenotypic, morphological and functional characteristics of macrophages found in spinal cord lesions unlike populations harvested from other bodily sources (Longbrake et al , 2007). This particular population of macrophages has been shown to retain the phenotypic, morphological and functional characteristics of macrophages found in spinal cord lesions unlike populations harvested from other bodily sources (Longbrake et al , 2007). This particular population of macrophages has been shown to retain the phenotypic, morphological and functional characteristics of macrophages found in spinal cord lesions unlike populations harvested from other bodily sources (Longbrake et al , 2007). This particular population of macrophages has been shown to retain the phenotypic, morphological and functional characteristics of macrophages found in spinal cord lesions unlike populations harvested from other bodily sources (Longbrake et al , 2007). Dorsal Column Crush Lesion ModelThirty-three adult female Sprague-Dawley rats (250-300g) were used for in vivo studies. Dorsal Column Crush Lesion ModelThirty-three adult female Sprague-Dawley rats (250-300g) were used for in vivo studies. Dorsal Column Crush Lesion ModelThirty-three adult female Sprague-Dawley rats (250-300g) were used for in vivo studies. Cortical microglia were harvested from P1 Sprague-Dawley rats and matured in vitro prior to their addition to time-lapse cultures. Cortical microglia were harvested from P1 Sprague-Dawley rats and matured in vitro prior to their addition to time-lapse cultures. Similar to primary macrophages, primary microglia had to be stimulated with interferon-gamma and LPS to become activated in culture. The environment of a spinal cord lesion is extremely complex. 9A, B, G); however, the contacts between activated microglia and dystrophic axons were not as strong as those of macrophages. 9A, B, G); however, the contacts between activated microglia and dystrophic axons were not as strong as those of macrophages. 9A, B, G); however, the contacts between activated microglia and dystrophic axons were not as strong as those of macrophages. Astrocytes are an integral component of the glial scar following injury to the CNS. They are present in high numbers and extensively contact regenerating axons. A T1 laminectomy was performed to expose the dorsal aspect of the C8 spinal cord segment. A T1 laminectomy was performed to expose the dorsal aspect of the C8 spinal cord segment. Therefore, the induction of retraction was specific to interactions with ED-1+ phagocytic cells and not merely physical interactions with any other cell type. This indicates that the behavior of macrophages in vivo is state-dependent and corresponds with previous work showing that macrophage infiltration only correlates with axonal retraction in the presence of myelin degeneration (McPhail et al , 2004). A dorsal column crush lesion was then made by inserting Dumont # 3 jeweler's forceps into the dorsal spinal cord at C8 to a depth of 1.0 mm and squeezing the forceps, holding pressure for ten seconds and repeating two additional times. Axonal retraction has been examined in other pathways within the spinal cord including the descending cortical spinal tract (Fishman and Kelley, 1984; Iizuka et al , 1987; Hill et al , 2001; Seif et al , 2007), bulbospinal tract (Houle and Jin, 2001), and rubrospinal tract (Schwartz et al , 2005; Cao et al , 2008). Axonal retraction has been examined in other pathways within the spinal cord including the descending cortical spinal tract (Fishman and Kelley, 1984; Iizuka et al , 1987; Hill et al , 2001; Seif et al , 2007), bulbospinal tract (Houle and Jin, 2001), and rubrospinal tract (Schwartz et al , 2005; Cao et al , 2008). Axonal retraction has been examined in other pathways within the spinal cord including the descending cortical spinal tract (Fishman and Kelley, 1984; Iizuka et al , 1987; Hill et al , 2001; Seif et al , 2007), bulbospinal tract (Houle and Jin, 2001), and rubrospinal tract (Schwartz et al , 2005; Cao et al , 2008). Axonal retraction has been examined in other pathways within the spinal cord including the descending cortical spinal tract (Fishman and Kelley, 1984; Iizuka et al , 1987; Hill et al , 2001; Seif et al , 2007), bulbospinal tract (Houle and Jin, 2001), and rubrospinal tract (Schwartz et al , 2005; Cao et al , 2008). A mouse strain with a diminished immune response exhibits an increase of axonal growth in the lesion following contusive spinal cord injury (Ma et al , 2004). A mouse strain with a diminished immune response exhibits an increase of axonal growth in the lesion following contusive spinal cord injury (Ma et al , 2004). A mouse strain with a diminished immune response exhibits an increase of axonal growth in the lesion following contusive spinal cord injury (Ma et al , 2004). The dual nature of the effects of macrophages on CNS regeneration is complicated (Popovich and Longbrake, 2008) and suggests that the best approach for treatment following spinal cord injury may be to modify the state of macrophage activation rather than deplete the macrophages altogether (Blight, 1992; Jones et al , 2005; Hohlfeld et al , 2007). The muscle layers were sutured with 4-0 nylon suture, and the skin was closed with surgical staples. This movie was made from 100× phase images taken every 30 seconds.Movie S2: Time-lapse movie of dystrophic adult DRG neurons cultured on an inverse aggrecan/laminin gradient. This movie was made from 100× phase images taken every 30 sec.Movie S4: Time-lapse movie of dystrophic adult DRG neurons cultured on an inverse aggrecan/laminin gradient. Post-operatively, animals were kept warm with a heating lamp during recovery from anesthesia and allowed access to food and water ad libitum. This movie was made from 100× phase images taken every 30 sec. Animals were killed at 2, 4, 7, 14, or 28 days post-lesion (N=3 per group). Components of the glial scar, such as highly sulfated proteoglycans, Ephs, slits, and myelin membrane fragments (Filbin, 2003; Silver and Miller, 2004; Harel and Strittmatter, 2006; Yiu and He, 2006; Busch and Silver, 2007; Xie and Zheng, 2008) as well as the process of neuroinflammation (Donnelly and Popovich, 2008) all contribute to regeneration failure. Clodronate was encapsulated in liposomes as described previously (Van Rooijen and Sanders, 1994). Briefly, the sciatic nerve of the right hindlimb was exposed and crushed with Dumont #3 forceps for tens seconds and repeated two additional times. Post-operatively, animals were kept warm with a heating lamp during recovery from anesthesia and allowed access to food and water ad libitum. Tissue was then stained with anti-GFAP (Accurate Chemical and Scientific Corporation, Westbury, NY), anti-ED-1 (Millipore, Billerica, MA) and incubated with Alexafluor-405 or Alexafluor-488 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) respectively, and then imaged on a Zeiss Axiovert 510 laser-scanning confocal microscope. We quantified a specific population and location of labeled axons that could be consistently examined and accurately quantified in all animals. Both the central and peripheral roots were removed and ganglia were incubated in a solution of Collagenase II (200 U/mL, Worthington) and Dispase II (2.5 U/mL, Roche) in HBSS. Briefly, a single hole was drilled through the upper half of the side wall of each dish with a number 2 bit to create a port for the addition of cells to the cultures during time-lapse microscopy. The hole created was sufficiently large enough to allow passage of a 20 ga. needle while small enough to prevent media leakage. Dishes were then rinsed with sterile water and coated with poly-l-lysine (0.1 mg/mL, Sigma) overnight at room temperature, rinsed with sterile water and allowed to dry. After the aggrecan spots dried completely, the entire surface of the dish was bathed in laminin solution (10 ug/mL, BTI, Stoughton, MA) in HBSS-CMF for three hours at 37 degrees Celsius. The laminin bath was then removed immediately before plating of cells. It is important to note that the concentrations of substrates used here differ from those used by Tom et al , 2004. It is important to note that the concentrations of substrates used here differ from those used by Tom et al , 2004. It is important to note that the concentrations of substrates used here differ from those used by Tom et al , 2004. It is important to note that the concentrations of substrates used here differ from those used by Tom et al , 2004. It is important to note that the concentrations of substrates used here differ from those used by Tom et al , 2004. However, to compensate for the difference in substrate binding to the dish surface, we have had to recalibrate the concentrations of the substrates used to those listed above.Following time-lapse imaging, DRGs were fixed in 4% PFA and immunostained with anti B-tubulin-type III (1:500; Sigma, St. Louis, MO) and anti-chondroitin sulfate (CS-56, 1:500, Sigma). However, to compensate for the difference in substrate binding to the dish surface, we have had to recalibrate the concentrations of the substrates used to those listed above.Following time-lapse imaging, DRGs were fixed in 4% PFA and immunostained with anti B-tubulin-type III (1:500; Sigma, St. Louis, MO) and anti-chondroitin sulfate (CS-56, 1:500, Sigma). The supernatant was removed and the pellet containing bone marrow precursor cells was resuspended and plated in DMEM additionally supplemented with 20% LADMAC cell line-conditioned media (generous gift of Dr. Clifford Harding) to induce differentiation into macrophages. Cells were fed on days 5, 7, 9, and harvested for experimentation on day 10 in culture. Cells were fed on days 5, 7, 9, and harvested for experimentation on day 10 in culture. In experiments involving “activated primary macrophages”, cells were stimulated with 2 ng/ml interferon-gamma (generous gift of Dr. Clifford Harding) and 20 ug/ml LPS (Sigma) or interferon-gamma alone for 1 day prior to use in time-lapse to elevate the activation state of the cells. Cortical Astrocyte PreparationCortical astrocytes were harvested from the cortices of P0-P1 rats. Cortical Microglia PreparationCortical microglia were harvested by removing the cortices of P0-P1 rats. 