Axon pruning via axon fragmentation or by axosome shedding result in axonal fragments left behind. Axon pruning via axon fragmentation or by axosome shedding result in axonal fragments left behind. Two studies from the Ito and Luo labs have shown that glial membranes infiltrate the degenerating lobes[68,69]. Following dendrite severing and local degeneration, the dendritic debris of Drosophila da neurons is also removed in a timely fashion. Following dendrite severing and local degeneration, the dendritic debris of Drosophila da neurons is also removed in a timely fashion. Following dendrite severing and local degeneration, the dendritic debris of Drosophila da neurons is also removed in a timely fashion. Following dendrite severing and local degeneration, the dendritic debris of Drosophila da neurons is also removed in a timely fashion. Following dendrite severing and local degeneration, the dendritic debris of Drosophila da neurons is also removed in a timely fashion. Early studies have reported that plasmatocytes, phagocytic blood cells, are responsible for engulfing dendritic debris and in a few cases were seen to “attack” intact branches [32]. Apart from this descriptive study, however, we know virtually nothing about the cellular and molecular mechanism of neurite fragment clearance in mammalian systems. In contrast, we know much more about the role of microglia, astrocytes and Schwann cells in the local pruning of synapses in the mammalian visual system, NMJ and hippocampus [79]. One attractive candidate is phosphatidylserine (PS), which is the prime “eat me“ signal on apoptotic cells [83]. One attractive candidate is phosphatidylserine (PS), which is the prime “eat me“ signal on apoptotic cells [83]. Indeed Draper is known to play a key role in the engulfment of apoptotic cells, and was recently shown to bind directly to PS [84]. Indeed Draper is known to play a key role in the engulfment of apoptotic cells, and was recently shown to bind directly to PS [84]. Indeed Draper is known to play a key role in the engulfment of apoptotic cells, and was recently shown to bind directly to PS [84]. Indeed Draper is known to play a key role in the engulfment of apoptotic cells, and was recently shown to bind directly to PS [84]. Members of two major guidance molecule families, the semaphorins and ephrins, have been implicated in axon pruning. Whether the responding axons have to be primed in parallel to the expression of Sema3F and whether forced expression of Sema3F at an earlier developmental stage will induce pruning of these axons is currently unknown. One possibility is that signaling from the Sema3F receptor complex indirectly controls the reverse signaling by EB3. Pruning by TGF-β receptorsIn Drosophila, signaling by the TGF-β receptor complex controls developmental pruning of both MB axons [91] and da dendrites [31] Fengwei Yu, personal communication). Pruning by TGF-β receptorsIn Drosophila, signaling by the TGF-β receptor complex controls developmental pruning of both MB axons [91] and da dendrites [31] Fengwei Yu, personal communication). In MB neurons, the TGF-β receptor complex includes the type I receptor Baboon (Babo) and either one of the type II receptors Punt (Put) or Wishful thinking (Wit)[91]. As a consequence, we will not discuss all of the neuronal systems that undergo remodeling nor all of the important work done in the field. However, there is no clear evidence that EcR-B1 is a direct target of the Smads and other direct Smad responsive genes that are required for pruning have not been identified. While TGF-β signaling does regulate the expression of EcR-B1 within MB γ neurons, the precise temporal regulation is achieved by the systemic release of the steroid hormone ecdysone, which in turn modulates the activity of EcR-B1. Pruning by death receptorsAxon elimination might be seen as the “death” of an axon. To induce competition, the authors silenced synaptic activity by inducing the expression of the tetanus toxin light chain, which inhibits neurosecretory activity, in a small random subset of olfactory neurons. Importantly, when most of the olfactory neurons were silenced, no pruning was detected suggesting that competition, rather then lack of activity by itself induces the pruning process. Importantly, when most of the olfactory neurons were silenced, no pruning was detected suggesting that competition, rather then lack of activity by itself induces the pruning process. Additional studies in da neurons demonstrated that the ubiquitin E2 protein UbcD1 is required for pruning. Additional studies in da neurons demonstrated that the ubiquitin E2 protein UbcD1 is required for pruning. Additional studies in da neurons demonstrated that the ubiquitin E2 protein UbcD1 is required for pruning. Additional studies in da neurons demonstrated that the ubiquitin E2 protein UbcD1 is required for pruning. The relative contribution of the DIAP1 vs Cullin1 dependent proteasome degradation remains to be determined.In contrast to our knowledge about the roles of the UPS in the pruning of fly da neuron dendrites, the exact function of the UPS in the pruning of fly MB axons is less clear. Whether the UPS functions at the initiation or execution of pruning or at both steps still needs to be further delineated. Whether the UPS functions at the initiation or execution of pruning or at both steps still needs to be further delineated. Although initially discovered as executers of apoptotic cell death, it is now well established that these family of proteases are regulators of cell morphogenesis [104,105]. Early studies on fly da neurons provided clear evidence that the initiator caspase, Dronc (the Casapses-9 homolog), and the executer caspases, Drice and DCP-1 (homologs of Casapse-3), are essential for developmental da dendrite pruning [63,36,35]. This requirement was shown in both global deprivation, in which cell death accompany axonal elimination, as well as in axonal restricted deprivation using compartmentalized chambers. This requirement was shown in both global deprivation, in which cell death accompany axonal elimination, as well as in axonal restricted deprivation using compartmentalized chambers. In Drosophila, calcium transients through a voltage-gated calcium channel in da dendrites were postulated to activate calpains, which facilitate efficient pruning [111]. GSK3s are negative regulators of many microtubule (MT) polymerization factors, controlling both their MT binding ability as well as their stability, which may be a key step in MT breakdown during pruning (see below). GSK3s are negative regulators of many microtubule (MT) polymerization factors, controlling both their MT binding ability as well as their stability, which may be a key step in MT breakdown during pruning (see below). Downstream elements: breakdown of the axonal cytoskeletonThe neuronal cytoskeleton consists of three major cytoskeletal elements: neurofilaments (NFs), actin and microtubules. NFs provide the structural support necessary to sustain axons whose volume is often thousands of times larger than the volume of the soma [117]. NFs provide the structural support necessary to sustain axons whose volume is often thousands of times larger than the volume of the soma [117]. NFs provide the structural support necessary to sustain axons whose volume is often thousands of times larger than the volume of the soma [117]. MTs are highly dynamic polymers whose assembly and disassembly is controlled by β tubulin guanosine triphosphate (GTP) hydrolyzation [121]. Furthermore, the MT stabilizing agent paclitaxel is sufficient to protect MT depolymerization as well as axon fragmentation following trophic deprivation in vitro [123]. Furthermore, the MT stabilizing agent paclitaxel is sufficient to protect MT depolymerization as well as axon fragmentation following trophic deprivation in vitro [123]. The molecular machinery that executes this breakdown is largely unknown. In contrast to Sox14, MICAL is important for da dendrite but not MB axon pruning [129], suggesting that SOX14 may activate a different pruning program in different neurons. In contrast to Sox14, MICAL is important for da dendrite but not MB axon pruning [129], suggesting that SOX14 may activate a different pruning program in different neurons. Finally, spatial and perhaps also temporal regulation is provided by the TGF-β signaling cascade (as discussed above). Finally, spatial and perhaps also temporal regulation is provided by the TGF-β signaling cascade (as discussed above). An additional enigma is how a transcription factor would control a process that is tightly spatially regulated. An additional enigma is how a transcription factor would control a process that is tightly spatially regulated. An additional enigma is how a transcription factor would control a process that is tightly spatially regulated. Moreover, the current data is still consistent with two main models – in one, the UPS is required to target a key molecule whose degradation initiates pruning; in the second, the UPS targets many proteins whose SUM degradation results in pruning. The substrates for these caspases during neurite pruning are not known – cytoskeletal components being one attractive but yet unsupported candidate. The substrates for these caspases during neurite pruning are not known – cytoskeletal components being one attractive but yet unsupported candidate. The substrates for these caspases during neurite pruning are not known – cytoskeletal components being one attractive but yet unsupported candidate. The substrates for these caspases during neurite pruning are not known – cytoskeletal components being one attractive but yet unsupported candidate. Recent studies suggest that the threshold of caspase activation determines whether it affects morphogenesis or activates cell death [134]. Recent studies suggest that the threshold of caspase activation determines whether it affects morphogenesis or activates cell death [134]. Recent studies suggest that the threshold of caspase activation determines whether it affects morphogenesis or activates cell death [134]. Recent studies suggest that the threshold of caspase activation determines whether it affects morphogenesis or activates cell death [134]. Recent studies suggest that the threshold of caspase activation determines whether it affects morphogenesis or activates cell death [134]. Recent studies suggest that the threshold of caspase activation determines whether it affects morphogenesis or activates cell death [134]. Is each case of pruning initiated by a different signal or are we yet to discover some common signal? Is each case of pruning initiated by a different signal or are we yet to discover some common signal? Interestingly, the TGF-β pathway was recently found to regulate neuronal C1q expression, which in turn is important for synaptic elimination by microglia at the developing mouse dLGN [136]. We want to provide a few speculative reasons that might explain why evolution sculpted neurodevelopment in this way by addressing specific examples. We want to provide a few speculative reasons that might explain why evolution sculpted neurodevelopment in this way by addressing specific examples. We want to provide a few speculative reasons that might explain why evolution sculpted neurodevelopment in this way by addressing specific examples. One clear example is the remodeling of da neurons in Drosophila – while the soma and axon remain intact, dendrites remodel to reflect the metamorphing animal and thus new connection. Although axon degeneration is a term that can sometimes be used to describe pruning and subsequent elimination, in this review, we will use degeneration to describe pathological conditions during disease and following injury (for example, in Wallerian Degeneration – see more below) while we will use fragmentation followed by clearance to describe developmental neurite pruning. Although axon degeneration is a term that can sometimes be used to describe pruning and subsequent elimination, in this review, we will use degeneration to describe pathological conditions during disease and following injury (for example, in Wallerian Degeneration – see more below) while we will use fragmentation followed by clearance to describe developmental neurite pruning. Although axon degeneration is a term that can sometimes be used to describe pruning and subsequent elimination, in this review, we will use degeneration to describe pathological conditions during disease and following injury (for example, in Wallerian Degeneration – see more below) while we will use fragmentation followed by clearance to describe developmental neurite pruning. The answer to “why” stereotyped pruning occurs as an evolutionary solution remains a mystery. The answer to “why” stereotyped pruning occurs as an evolutionary solution remains a mystery. The answer to “why” stereotyped pruning occurs as an evolutionary solution remains a mystery. The answer to “why” stereotyped pruning occurs as an evolutionary solution remains a mystery. Thus, according to Sperry, each axon “knows” where to go during the initial wiring of the nervous system or even when the circuit has to reassemble itself after injury. Thus, according to Sperry, each axon “knows” where to go during the initial wiring of the nervous system or even when the circuit has to reassemble itself after injury. Anterograde labeling followed by careful microscopic analysis has revealed that the exuberant connections undergo fragmentation [18] and are later removed by an unknown mechanism. Anterograde labeling followed by careful microscopic analysis has revealed that the exuberant connections undergo fragmentation [18] and are later removed by an unknown mechanism. Anterograde labeling followed by careful microscopic analysis has revealed that the exuberant connections undergo fragmentation [18] and are later removed by an unknown mechanism. In a process that is reviewed elsewhere [22], and is mediated by Ephrin-ephR counter gradients, each RGC sends an axon that extends almost through the entire SC, and later initiates sprouting in an area that will become the ‘target zone’. In a process that is reviewed elsewhere [22], and is mediated by Ephrin-ephR counter gradients, each RGC sends an axon that extends almost through the entire SC, and later initiates sprouting in an area that will become the ‘target zone’. Since then, techniques such as mosaic analysis with a repressible cell marker (MARCM) were developed and have revolutionized our ability to visualize and manipulate neurons in vivo in up to a single cell resolution [28]. Since then, techniques such as mosaic analysis with a repressible cell marker (MARCM) were developed and have revolutionized our ability to visualize and manipulate neurons in vivo in up to a single cell resolution [28]. Despite its beauty and simplicity, it has become evident in recent years that the chemoaffinity theory provides only a partial answer to how the wiring of the nervous system is established in vivo during development. Genetic as well as live imaging experiments in both systems should help shed light on these open questionsThe mechanisms of neurite fragmentation are better understood, however, in the case of the remodeling of the dendritic arborization (da) neurons in Drosophila [32,31,33]. The dendrites of these sensory neurons cover the larval body wall in a nicely tiled manner [34]. However, the extent of the molecular similarity between dendrite remodeling of da neurons and Wallerian degeneration is not yet clear. However, the extent of the molecular similarity between dendrite remodeling of da neurons and Wallerian degeneration is not yet clear. These regressive events eliminate cells, synapses and long stretches of axons in a precise and timely fashion during development and are essential to sculpt the mature nervous system of both vertebrates and invertebrates. These regressive events eliminate cells, synapses and long stretches of axons in a precise and timely fashion during development and are essential to sculpt the mature nervous system of both vertebrates and invertebrates. For example, axon pruning of the hippocampal infrapyramidal bundle (IPB) in mammals is currently assumed to occur via axon retraction although this is mostly based on lack of fragmentation and direct evidence for retraction is lacking (Figure 3;[45] ). For example, axon pruning of the hippocampal infrapyramidal bundle (IPB) in mammals is currently assumed to occur via axon retraction although this is mostly based on lack of fragmentation and direct evidence for retraction is lacking (Figure 3;[45] ). For example, axon pruning of the hippocampal infrapyramidal bundle (IPB) in mammals is currently assumed to occur via axon retraction although this is mostly based on lack of fragmentation and direct evidence for retraction is lacking (Figure 3;[45] ). The elimination of these exuberant connections is largely timed to postnatal development in vertebrates but the precise timing varies among organisms [7]. Pruning by axosome sheddingDuring development of the mammalian neuromuscular junction (NMJ) pervasive synapse elimination occurs after birth amounting to the elimination of ~90% of existing synapses [47,48]. 