Brain tumor–initiating stem cellsNormal neural stem cells can be isolated in culture as clonally derived colonies termed neurospheres21. We next established primary cultures of the brain tumor induced by the combined activation of H-Ras and AKT in GFAP-Cre Tp53+/− mice and determined that the cultures contained brain tumor–initiating stem cells (BTICs). 5a) and negative for neuronal markers (microtubule-associated protein 2, and Tuj1, data not shown), astrocyte markers (s100β and GFAP, data not shown) and oligodendrocyte markers (RIP and O4, data not shown). Injection of only 100 005 tumor cells into the hippocampus of NOD-SCID mice resulted in the formation of tumors (seven of nine mice, average latency 40 ± 6 d, Fig. Injection of only 100 005 tumor cells into the hippocampus of NOD-SCID mice resulted in the formation of tumors (seven of nine mice, average latency 40 ± 6 d, Fig. The technology reported here might be useful to model various human cancers in animals. The technology reported here might be useful to model various human cancers in animals. The tumor showed glioma-like histopathology, including increased cellular density, necrosis within the dense cellular lesion and intratumoral hemorrhage (Fig. We conclude that tumorsphere-forming cells derived from our mouse model of glioblastoma multiforme, self renew, differentiate in vitro and have strong tumor-initiating activity similar to previously reported BTICs4,24. Because GFAP+ cells in the hippocampus or subventricular zone are likely to contain both differentiated astrocytes and neural progenitor cells8,28, these cell types could be the cellular origin of the glioblastoma multiforme–like tumors in our model. Some of the discrepancies between the two models might be attributed to the differences between K-Ras and H-Ras in vivo. One of the advantages of our strategy is that this method can be used to clarify the differences between tumors caused by the same oncogenic events occurring in different regions of the brain. This result is consistent with a previous report showing that neurogenic areas such as the subventricular zone and hippocampus are more sensitive to oncogenic stimuli, such as chemicals, than other areas29. Another explanation is that GFAP+ neural progenitor cells, which are abundant in neurogenic areas, may be more susceptible to transformation than GFAP+ differentiated astrocytes, which are abundant in the cortex. To construct pTomo H-RasV12, we amplified N-terminus Flag-tagged H-RasV12 from pGEM H-RasV12 by PCR and inserted it into the BamHI site of the pTomo vector. To construct pTomo H-RasV12, we amplified N-terminus Flag-tagged H-RasV12 from pGEM H-RasV12 by PCR and inserted it into the BamHI site of the pTomo vector. To construct pTomo H-RasV12, we amplified N-terminus Flag-tagged H-RasV12 from pGEM H-RasV12 by PCR and inserted it into the BamHI site of the pTomo vector. We confirmed all PCR fragments by sequencing. To achieve this goal, we performed region-specific injection of lentiviral vectors that can transduce both neural stem and progenitor cells and terminally differentiated astrocytes5. In vivo vector injectionWe stereotaxically injected a small amount of viruses (0.8 μl, 1 × 108 international units) into mice at the age of 8–16 weeks old who were under anesthesia with ketamine-xylazine solution. We transferred the proteins to a nitrocellulose membrane and probed the membrane with the antibodies listed in Supplementary Table 3 online. The antibodies used are listed in Supplementary Table 3. For detection with fluorescence, we cut 40-μm coronal sections on a sliding microtome and processed the sections for standard immunohistochemical staining as previously described34. For H&E staining, we embedded the fixed brains in paraffin, cut them into 6-μm sections and stained with H&E. We obtained the images with a Retiga digital camera on a Nikon optical microscope and analyzed them with OpenLab software (Improvision). We also acquired T2-weighted anatomical images before with a two-dimensional fast spin-echo sequence TR / TE = 2900/35.5, FA 90, BW 15.63. The after-contrast dataset was semi-manually segmented and volume-rendered with Amira software (Template Graphic Software) to produce quantitative three-dimensional models of the area of contrast enhancement in the brain tissue. 1b,c).In addition to being expressed in mature astrocytes, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) has been reported to be expressed in multipotent neural stem cells in the hippocampus and subventricular zone in the postnatal and adult brain8. 1b,c).In addition to being expressed in mature astrocytes, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) has been reported to be expressed in multipotent neural stem cells in the hippocampus and subventricular zone in the postnatal and adult brain8. 1b,c).In addition to being expressed in mature astrocytes, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) has been reported to be expressed in multipotent neural stem cells in the hippocampus and subventricular zone in the postnatal and adult brain8. 1d) and oligodendrocytes (detected by the marker O4, data not shown), which is consistent with a previous report10. We next tried to activate AKT signaling by injecting Tomo AKT lentiviral vectors (Tomo lentiviral vectors harboring a hemagglutinin (HA)-tagged activated form of AKT) into brains of GFAP-Cre mice. We next tried to activate AKT signaling by injecting Tomo AKT lentiviral vectors (Tomo lentiviral vectors harboring a hemagglutinin (HA)-tagged activated form of AKT) into brains of GFAP-Cre mice. We next tried to activate AKT signaling by injecting Tomo AKT lentiviral vectors (Tomo lentiviral vectors harboring a hemagglutinin (HA)-tagged activated form of AKT) into brains of GFAP-Cre mice. We next tried to activate AKT signaling by injecting Tomo AKT lentiviral vectors (Tomo lentiviral vectors harboring a hemagglutinin (HA)-tagged activated form of AKT) into brains of GFAP-Cre mice. Control GFAP-Cre mice injected with mock vectors showed no tumor formation (Supplementary Table 1). 1b) transduced with Tomo lentiviral vectors. However, nuclear pleomorphism, a phenotype generally found in human high-grade gliomas, was not obvious. However, nuclear pleomorphism, a phenotype generally found in human high-grade gliomas, was not obvious. However, nuclear pleomorphism, a phenotype generally found in human high-grade gliomas, was not obvious. However, nuclear pleomorphism, a phenotype generally found in human high-grade gliomas, was not obvious. However, nuclear pleomorphism, a phenotype generally found in human high-grade gliomas, was not obvious. All mice (17 of 17 mice) injected with H-RasV12 and AKT lentiviral vectors into the hippocampus formed tumors (Fig. All mice (17 of 17 mice) injected with H-RasV12 and AKT lentiviral vectors into the hippocampus formed tumors (Fig. All mice (17 of 17 mice) injected with H-RasV12 and AKT lentiviral vectors into the hippocampus formed tumors (Fig. All mice (17 of 17 mice) injected with H-RasV12 and AKT lentiviral vectors into the hippocampus formed tumors (Fig. Histological analyses of the tumor from hippocampus revealed lesions showing high cellular density, intratumoral hemorrhage (Fig. Consistent with this result, the overexpression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and VEGF receptor-2 (VEGFR2) in the tumor tissues were observed (Fig. 3 and 4 and Supplementary Table 2 online).P53 has been shown to have a role in inducing senescence in response to oncogenic stimuli, resulting in resistance to cellular transformation, and, therefore, the loss of Tp53 is thought to allow the tumor cells to bypass the oncogene-induced senescence19. 3 and 4 and Supplementary Table 2 online).P53 has been shown to have a role in inducing senescence in response to oncogenic stimuli, resulting in resistance to cellular transformation, and, therefore, the loss of Tp53 is thought to allow the tumor cells to bypass the oncogene-induced senescence19. 5a), probably because H-Ras and AKT, which are known to be downstream of EGFR, have sufficiently been activated in this model14,15. 5a), probably because H-Ras and AKT, which are known to be downstream of EGFR, have sufficiently been activated in this model14,15. 6b) and MDM2 is known to be transcriptionally activated by p53 (ref. 6b) and MDM2 is known to be transcriptionally activated by p53 (ref. 