Initial studies using this technique suggested that PVH OXT (OXTPVH) cells project to the NTS in rats(76). Ablation of OXT or OXT receptors in mice has little effect on body weight regulation until animals are placed on a high-fat diet, which promote only a slight enhancement of diet-induced obesity (due to decreased energy expenditure, not hyperphagia) (78, 79). Ablation of OXT or OXT receptors in mice has little effect on body weight regulation until animals are placed on a high-fat diet, which promote only a slight enhancement of diet-induced obesity (due to decreased energy expenditure, not hyperphagia) (78, 79). Ablation of OXT or OXT receptors in mice has little effect on body weight regulation until animals are placed on a high-fat diet, which promote only a slight enhancement of diet-induced obesity (due to decreased energy expenditure, not hyperphagia) (78, 79). Ablation of OXT or OXT receptors in mice has little effect on body weight regulation until animals are placed on a high-fat diet, which promote only a slight enhancement of diet-induced obesity (due to decreased energy expenditure, not hyperphagia) (78, 79). Ablation of OXT or OXT receptors in mice has little effect on body weight regulation until animals are placed on a high-fat diet, which promote only a slight enhancement of diet-induced obesity (due to decreased energy expenditure, not hyperphagia) (78, 79). Since the PVH is the major output originating from the hypothalamus, it receives input from the majority of hypothalamic sites (ARC, VMH, DMH, etc. The PVH also receives dense innervation from forebrain regions (i.e. Specifically, the ARC receives dense innervation from the DMH and VMH, and minor innervation from the SON and PMV (Fig. Specifically, the ARC receives dense innervation from the DMH and VMH, and minor innervation from the SON and PMV (Fig. More recently, techniques have been established that allow for modifying neuronal populations in adult animals on both acute and chronic time scales in order to determine the control of distinct aspects of energy balance (e.g. More recently, techniques have been established that allow for modifying neuronal populations in adult animals on both acute and chronic time scales in order to determine the control of distinct aspects of energy balance (e.g. Additional experiments aimed to test the sufficiency of neuronal populations to drive acute changes in energy expenditure also indicate that activation of the PVH drives increased activity and energy expenditure in the mouse (34, 60, 75). (91) Whether these discrepancies identify separate roles for distinct aspects of energy expenditure (e.g. (91) Whether these discrepancies identify separate roles for distinct aspects of energy expenditure (e.g. thermogenesis vs. physical activity) or reflect differences between species has not yet been determined. Furthermore, recent molecular genetic tools have made it possible to elucidate the neurobiological mechanisms underlying body weight regulation. Additional studies in multiple species identified direct connections between the PVH and the IML, a region in the thoracic spinal cord important for the regulation of sympathetic output(93). It is also a complex behavior influenced and controlled by a variety of CNS sites. In fact, leptin-responsive ARC Rip+ neurons (which do not include POMC neurons) regulate thermogenesis via the release of GABA into the PVH. Additional hypothalamic sites upstream of the PVH with the capability to regulate energy expenditure include both the DMH and VMH. Lastly, non-hypothalamic sites such as the NTS are also strong regulators of the PVH and are known to regulate sympathetic function and control sympathetic outflow. Mice homozygous for the autosomal recessive obese (ob) and diabetes (db) mutations are hyperphagic and display decreased energy utilization, and are extremely obese and diabetic (5). Mice homozygous for the autosomal recessive obese (ob) and diabetes (db) mutations are hyperphagic and display decreased energy utilization, and are extremely obese and diabetic (5). Mice homozygous for the autosomal recessive obese (ob) and diabetes (db) mutations are hyperphagic and display decreased energy utilization, and are extremely obese and diabetic (5). With this understanding, it follows that ARC populations involved in ARC-PVH circuit output as it relates to energy balance include both LepRb-containing and non-LepRb neurons. With this understanding, it follows that ARC populations involved in ARC-PVH circuit output as it relates to energy balance include both LepRb-containing and non-LepRb neurons. Leptin administration to leptin-deficient (ob/ob) or normal mice decreases food intake and increases basal metabolic rate, along with activity(8–10). Thus, although human obesity resulting from disruption of leptin or LepRb (or other monogenic causes) is rare, leptin and the neural pathways it controls represent crucial players in the control of feeding and energy balance(17). Mice containing the yellow mutation of the agouti locus (Ay) are notable for the dominant inheritance of a striking yellow coat color and obesity proportional to the intensity of the coat color(5). Mice containing the yellow mutation of the agouti locus (Ay) are notable for the dominant inheritance of a striking yellow coat color and obesity proportional to the intensity of the coat color(5). Indeed, genetic alterations in Mc4R represent the most common monogenetic form of human obesity, underlying the phenotype of 1–2.5% of morbidly obese patients(24, 25). Leptin and other signals converge with the melanocortin system in the ARC Additionally, leptin fails to significantly alter food intake or body weight in ARC-lesioned animals, suggesting that neurons of the ARC are required for effective leptin action(28). The ARC lies in close proximity to the median eminence with its permeable vasclature, permitting rapid access of circulating factors to the ARC. Indeed, the ARC contains perhaps the highest density of LepRb-expressing neurons in the brain, and many of these LepRb neurons express POMC or AgRP (Fig. AgRP-containing neurons release not only this endogenous melanocortin receptor antagonist, but also the inhibitory neurotransmitters neuropeptide Y (NPY) and gamma aminobutyric acid (GABA)); these neurons promote food intake and are inhibited by leptin (34–37) (38). This suggests that leptin mediates important melanocortin-independent effects and/or may control POMC and AgRP neurons by additional, indirect, mechanisms. This suggests that leptin mediates important melanocortin-independent effects and/or may control POMC and AgRP neurons by additional, indirect, mechanisms. Similar to leptin, serotonin increases the activity of POMC neurons and decreases AgRP neuronal activation(44, 45). Similar to leptin, serotonin increases the activity of POMC neurons and decreases AgRP neuronal activation(44, 45). Initial studies aimed at characterizing the role of the PVH in energy balance control identified the PVH as the primary hypothalamic site projecting to brainstem satiety regions, such as the NTS/DMV and parabrachial nucleus (PBN)(53). Initial studies aimed at characterizing the role of the PVH in energy balance control identified the PVH as the primary hypothalamic site projecting to brainstem satiety regions, such as the NTS/DMV and parabrachial nucleus (PBN)(53). Initial studies aimed at characterizing the role of the PVH in energy balance control identified the PVH as the primary hypothalamic site projecting to brainstem satiety regions, such as the NTS/DMV and parabrachial nucleus (PBN)(53). Initial studies aimed at characterizing the role of the PVH in energy balance control identified the PVH as the primary hypothalamic site projecting to brainstem satiety regions, such as the NTS/DMV and parabrachial nucleus (PBN)(53). Initial studies aimed at characterizing the role of the PVH in energy balance control identified the PVH as the primary hypothalamic site projecting to brainstem satiety regions, such as the NTS/DMV and parabrachial nucleus (PBN)(53). Initial studies aimed at characterizing the role of the PVH in energy balance control identified the PVH as the primary hypothalamic site projecting to brainstem satiety regions, such as the NTS/DMV and parabrachial nucleus (PBN)(53). For the regulation of satiety, projections from the PVH to the NTS are of particular interest, since the NTS is anatomically close to the area postrema (AP), a site adjacent to the fourth ventricle that lacks a blood brain barrier. The NTS is crucial for the satiety response that follows the ingestion of a meal, and at least part of this is conveyed via a direct glutamatergic projection to the PBN; connections to the PVH may also play a role(64) (65). Not only do a variety of single-gene mutations promote obesity in rodents, but also alterations in these genes (although generally rare) cause obesity in humans (2). Moreover, stimulation of Mc4RPVH terminals projecting to the PBN, but not NTS/DMV, suppresses feeding, suggesting that Mc4RPVH neurons control satiety via the PBN (Fig. The neurochemical identity of these Mc4RPVH cells has yet to be established. 