Thus a forensic DNA database can be thought of as a filing cabinet for a collection of these visualizations of identity. Thus a forensic DNA database can be thought of as a filing cabinet for a collection of these visualizations of identity. Thus a forensic DNA database can be thought of as a filing cabinet for a collection of these visualizations of identity. Thus a forensic DNA database can be thought of as a filing cabinet for a collection of these visualizations of identity. Thus a forensic DNA database can be thought of as a filing cabinet for a collection of these visualizations of identity. Prior to the introduction of the NDNAD, DNA profiling in the UK was largely confined to use in the investigation of serious crime. The story of Samuels’ detection is an example of the central idea which has fuelled the development of the NDNAD as an instrument of reconstructive surveillance. For if Samuels’ genetic profile had already been contained on the database prior to him committing rape, his detection would have been assured much earlier. It is difficult to calculate the exact amount of government expenditure on the database but the ‘DNA Expansion Programme’ first announced in 1999 will have cost roughly two hundred million pounds by April 2004. The exact amount of funding is less important than the commitment to fund the database in this way. The exact amount of funding is less important than the commitment to fund the database in this way. Yet this growth, which has produced a continual and dramatic rise in recorded hits made on the database (in July 2003, the FSS claimed that ‘in a typical month matches are found linking suspects to 15 murders, 31 rapes and 770 motor vehicle crimes’), has demanded significant investment and planning. The DNA Expansion Programme has driven the vast increase in the collection of DNA samples from an expanded amount of offenders (more than two million of these profiles are now contained on the database) and encouraged the routine sampling of a much wider range of crime scenes. The DNA Expansion Programme has driven the vast increase in the collection of DNA samples from an expanded amount of offenders (more than two million of these profiles are now contained on the database) and encouraged the routine sampling of a much wider range of crime scenes. The DNA Expansion Programme has driven the vast increase in the collection of DNA samples from an expanded amount of offenders (more than two million of these profiles are now contained on the database) and encouraged the routine sampling of a much wider range of crime scenes. Crime scene collection has been aided by the employment of more scene examiners and a vast increase in budget allocation for these personnel costs. We use the expression of the closed circuit of surveillance to draw attention to two idealisations that inform contemporary state and commercial organisations as they seek to develop and extend this new form of bio-surveillance over citizens and others: the resources and tactics whose routine deployment operationalizes this surveillance and the kinds of subjects that such surveillance effects. Although the tactics and applications of the NDNAD are contemporary they are being applied to problems informed by much older ideas and much older rhetorical figures. The aim of the NDNAD is to capture this group of offenders within its closed circuit archive in order to assure future detection. At present anyone can be included on this list of suspects once arrested for any recordable offence. Approximately 300,000 persons every year are arrested but not subsequently charged and are now included on the NDNAD. This is, of course, true in that any increase in the amount of individuals captured by the database will heighten match probability. The problem for the government comes in trying to justify why retaining the DNA profiles of those category of innocent people who have come to the attention of the police, as opposed to those innocent people who have not, is valuable for intelligence. Rose has argued that a new ‘game of power’, introduced in advanced liberal states as a ‘community-civility game’ (1999: 188), has contributed to the redefinition of the broadest questions about the social control of those deemed in need of governance by those authorized to govern. In this sense, the use of the NDNAD is not aimed at the ‘correction’ of offenders but at delimiting them from the wider population and managing them through assured detection. The interesting thing to monitor is how individuals from one group are moved into another and where the line between the two is drawn now and in the future. While there may be reasons to contest this characterisation, this type of forensic technology has proved to be effective and cost effective in its support to criminal investigations. While there may be reasons to contest this characterisation, this type of forensic technology has proved to be effective and cost effective in its support to criminal investigations. While there may be reasons to contest this characterisation, this type of forensic technology has proved to be effective and cost effective in its support to criminal investigations. It places a defined section of the community under permanent surveillance yet it watches no one. DNA profiling has quickly been adopted by law enforcement agencies across the UK and has displaced an earlier reliance on blood groups for the identification and differentiation of individuals. DNA profiling has quickly been adopted by law enforcement agencies across the UK and has displaced an earlier reliance on blood groups for the identification and differentiation of individuals. These factors, along with appropriate legislative support, have made possible the rapid worldwide introduction and accumulation of DNA databases to support crime investigation as well as to facilitate the identification of disaster victims and otherwise unidentified dead bodies. In addition, a series of more detailed enquires have examined the adoption and adaptation by modern states of a series of scientific and technological supports for corroborating the identities of present subjects and inferring the identities of absent ones. Foucault’s work has already been widely applied to suggest how surveillance technologies work upon, and through, the social body – producing both the docility of disciplinary subjection (as outlined in Foucault, 1977) and self referential forms of conduct (as expressed in Foucault, 1988; 1990). In developing our own perspective we agree with Valier that there are important differences between the ‘reconstructive perspective of criminal detection’ (Valier 2001: 428) and the ‘future oriented practices’ (Valier 2001: 427) that drive contemporary forms of visual and transactional surveillance. However we also think that recent developments in forensic uses of molecular biology merit reconsideration of any distinction between ‘reactive detection’ and ‘proactive surveillance’. However we also think that recent developments in forensic uses of molecular biology merit reconsideration of any distinction between ‘reactive detection’ and ‘proactive surveillance’. However we also think that recent developments in forensic uses of molecular biology merit reconsideration of any distinction between ‘reactive detection’ and ‘proactive surveillance’. However we also think that recent developments in forensic uses of molecular biology merit reconsideration of any distinction between ‘reactive detection’ and ‘proactive surveillance’. It is part of the argument of this paper that this distinction overlooks the multidimensional character of the technical and organisational differences and overlaps amongst the various forms of detection and surveillance used by government and commercial agencies in contemporary society. Panoptic power may be somewhat fictitious - for Foucault it operates by inducing in subjects a mode of subjection which is built on the potential for permanent observation rather than the permanence itself -but such tactics of surveillance are nevertheless employed in contemporary society in a vast number of different ways. The defining aspect of these reconstructive technologies is that they are applied retrospectively. It is clear that both types of instrumentalities of surveillance may be used to witness or reconstruct particular human actions and to identify specific human subjects. However, each of these two types of surveillance may be further differentiated by whether or not each variant within the types draw upon pre-existing archived information to support the achievement of recognitions and identifications in practice. The effectiveness of such surveillance, if it is to be meaningfully translated into individual detection, relies on its ability to provide a means of identifying either or both activities and individuals – what is being done and who is doing it. The effectiveness of such surveillance, if it is to be meaningfully translated into individual detection, relies on its ability to provide a means of identifying either or both activities and individuals – what is being done and who is doing it. For example, CCTV cameras in public or quasi public spaces provide highly discriminating images of individuals in the course of actions, but operators of such systems are often still expected to be able to identify individuals through memory (sometimes aided by a gallery of images of the usual suspects) and interpret the intentions and the consequences of actions through the interrogation of ordinary appearances. For example, CCTV cameras in public or quasi public spaces provide highly discriminating images of individuals in the course of actions, but operators of such systems are often still expected to be able to identify individuals through memory (sometimes aided by a gallery of images of the usual suspects) and interpret the intentions and the consequences of actions through the interrogation of ordinary appearances. Visibility may be a trap, but it is not a wholly effective one. This is true for both preconstructive and reconstructive instrumentalities: closure markedly increases the effectiveness of their deployment. This is true for both preconstructive and reconstructive instrumentalities: closure markedly increases the effectiveness of their deployment. Eco and Sebeok, 1983, Valier, 1998 & 2001, and Spufford and Uglow, 1996); and the trajectories of a number of specific forensic technologies (e.g. Historically the development of reconstructive instrumentalities has been intimately connected to the availability of searchable identity archives capable of facilitating identification through previously obtained and held information. Historically the development of reconstructive instrumentalities has been intimately connected to the availability of searchable identity archives capable of facilitating identification through previously obtained and held information. Others have followed this lead in order to reveal the variety of ways in which the work of visualisation is shaped by and in turn shapes scientific practice in a number of different disciplinary and historical contexts (see for example: Lynch and Woolgar, 1990; Tufte 1990 and 1997; Valier 2001). Consider for example the routine discovery of what is first available to the naked eye of a crime scene examiner as a reddish brown stain on the broken glass of the window of a burgled house. In the UK at the time of writing, this test is likely to the Kastle-Meyer test which uses the acid-based indicator phenolphthalin, colourless in an alkaline solution but which is oxidised by peroxide in the presence of haemoglobin into phenolphthalein and so turns bright pink. 