However, area strains and circumferential strains began decaying immediately after EIVC to approach zero at around EIVR. While they appeared to have similar mean area strains, free edge strains were larger on average in the radial direction, while mean belly strains were larger in the circumferential direction. Hence, abnormalities in deformational patterns in the mitral valve are indicative of disease and a predictor for future disease. Hence, abnormalities in deformational patterns in the mitral valve are indicative of disease and a predictor for future disease. Hence, abnormalities in deformational patterns in the mitral valve are indicative of disease and a predictor for future disease. Moreover, we found that radial strains were larger than circumferential strains (p = 0.044). The tricuspid valve has long been considered less important than its left-sided counterpart, the mitral valve (Mascherbauer and Maurer 2010). The tricuspid valve has long been considered less important than its left-sided counterpart, the mitral valve (Mascherbauer and Maurer 2010). The tricuspid valve has long been considered less important than its left-sided counterpart, the mitral valve (Mascherbauer and Maurer 2010). The tricuspid valve has long been considered less important than its left-sided counterpart, the mitral valve (Mascherbauer and Maurer 2010). The tricuspid valve has long been considered less important than its left-sided counterpart, the mitral valve (Mascherbauer and Maurer 2010). Consequently, knowledge of the mitral valve was frequently extrapolated to the tricuspid valve, which is not only futile because of their differing gross anatomy (Madukauwa-David et al  2018), but also because the tissues’ resident cells show different phenotypes (Taylor et al  2003; Merryman et al  2006). Specifically, tricuspid valve regurgitation, or leakage of the tricuspid valve, was historically considered tolerable (Braunwald et al  1967). Today, it is established that tricuspid valve regurgitation is a significant predictor of patient morbidity and mortality (Ton-Nu et al  2006). We found that strain magnitudes and patterns vary between leaflets, but, because of large deviations, could not confirm statistically that they vary between locations. However, we did confirm that strains are larger in the radial direction than in the circumferential direction, i.e., strains are anisotropic. On the other hand, their area strains reported for the anterior leaflet of 21% fall below our values of 74% and 97%, again, in the belly and free edge regions, respectively. Although they do not provide quantitative data, images of their strain fields imply maximum strains in radial and circumferential direction of up to ~ 50%, with largest strains consistently in the anterior leaflet. Although they do not provide quantitative data, images of their strain fields imply maximum strains in radial and circumferential direction of up to ~ 50%, with largest strains consistently in the anterior leaflet. Spinner et al  used biplane photogrammetry, while Kong et al  combined in vivo CT data with a complex nonlinear finite element framework. Spinner et al  used biplane photogrammetry, while Kong et al  combined in vivo CT data with a complex nonlinear finite element framework. Spinner et al  used biplane photogrammetry, while Kong et al  combined in vivo CT data with a complex nonlinear finite element framework. Spinner et al  used biplane photogrammetry, while Kong et al  combined in vivo CT data with a complex nonlinear finite element framework. Among future studies, we plan on performing similar experiments on a larger cohort of animals to reduce uncertainty. These findings are consistent between different in vivo methodologies (Sacks et al  2006; Bothe et al  2011a; Rausch et al  2011) and in silico studies (Rausch et al  2013). While these studies took critical steps toward an improved understanding of the deformation of tricuspid valve leaflets, each is subject to significant limitations. This is particularly true given the large inconsistencies between species and methodologies revealed in our discussion. Methodologically, the largest limitation is that our data were collected under open-chest, open-pericardium conditions. Methodologically, the largest limitation is that our data were collected under open-chest, open-pericardium conditions. Methodologically, the largest limitation is that our data were collected under open-chest, open-pericardium conditions. Methodologically, the largest limitation is that our data were collected under open-chest, open-pericardium conditions. Finally, because of the sparse distribution of sonomicrometry crystals across the leaflets, our methodology is insensitive to potential leaflet folding and unfolding in the inter-crystal spaces. Finally, because of the sparse distribution of sonomicrometry crystals across the leaflets, our methodology is insensitive to potential leaflet folding and unfolding in the inter-crystal spaces. Finally, because of the sparse distribution of sonomicrometry crystals across the leaflets, our methodology is insensitive to potential leaflet folding and unfolding in the inter-crystal spaces. We believe that large deviations in leaflet regions other than the belly and free edge may, at least in part, result from such effects. Thus, we believe our work is another important step toward a deepened understanding of the tricuspid valve leaflets, which will aid our basic scientific understanding of the valve itself and better inform future surgical and technological strategies toward tricuspid valve repair. 2.1Surgical procedureWe performed all surgical and experimental procedures according to the Principles of Laboratory Animal Care, formulated by the National Society for Medical Research, and the Guide for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals prepared by the National Academy of Science and published by the National Institutes of Health. To gain access to the heart, we performed a median sternotomy and subsequently prepared the animals for cardiopulmonary bypass. Subsequently, we exteriorized the valvular crystal wires through a right atriotomy and placed pressure transducers (PA4.5-X6; Konigsberg Instruments, Inc., Pasadena, CA, USA) in the right atrium and through the apex in the left and right ventricles. First, we computed a mean data set based on five animals. First, we computed a mean data set based on five animals. Note, we used the subdivided surfaces primarily to ease visualization, but performed all quantitative analyses on the original mesh. 2a), mid-belly crystal (ii), free edge crystals (v), and averaged the two lateral crystal locations (iii, iv), for each leaflet. To quantify the opening and closing angles, we fit a line to those markers in a least-squares sense. Subsequently, we computed the angle between this line and the least-squares plane fit to the annular markers for each time point and each leaflet. Moreover, we based our calculation of the opening and closing angular velocities on a finite difference scheme for those same data. Moreover, we based our calculation of the opening and closing angular velocities on a finite difference scheme for those same data. Specifically, for both the original triangular mesh and for the smoothed mesh, we interpolated each triangular element via linear shape functions in terms of the local curvilinear coordinates θα, with α= 1, 2; see Eq. Here, X(θ1, θ2) are the interpolated coordinates in the reference configuration, for which we chose ED because it is likely the time at which the leaflets are the least strained and therefore closest to a stress-free reference configuration. Here, X(θ1, θ2) are the interpolated coordinates in the reference configuration, for which we chose ED because it is likely the time at which the leaflets are the least strained and therefore closest to a stress-free reference configuration. (1)X(θ1,θ2)=∑i=1nNi(θ1,θ2)Xiandx(θ1,θ2)=∑i=1nNi(θ1,θ2)xi,Furthermore, Ni(θ1, θ2) are aforementioned linear shape functions, and Xi and xi are the crystal coordinates in the reference configuration and spatial configuration, respectively. (5) and reported the tensor’s largest eigenvalue. (5) and reported the tensor’s largest eigenvalue. Strains of the belly region and the free edge region over time are depicted in Fig. We observed that mean belly strains appeared generally larger than mean free edge strains. While belly strains were positive throughout systole and deviated marginally from zero during diastole, free edge strains were either small (area and circumferential strain) or negative (radial strain) during systole. 