The two most frequent questions asked by patients after learning of an SF were as follows: ‘What's next?’ and ‘Who else in the family needs to know and/or do something about this?’ Interviewees reported that what seemed to help patients manage this second reaction to receiving an SF was to provide a plan of care for the patient and to give referrals to relevant providers. Just not expecting to get that type of finding, not knowing that that was possible and kind of then the initial shock of this getting information that they weren't expecting to receive. I go a little bit more into detail because beforehand, I mean – I ordered a lot of exomes and hadn't had any secondary findings. (Interviewee 6)Since it's happened, having like, “We kind of talked about a minute ago”, you know, it's more real, so not kind of brushing over things as much, and making sure you really have a good conversation on the front end that this type of thing could happen. Numerous publications still state the need for more in-depth description of the actual experience of the clinical encounter to return SFs (Burke et al , 2013; Townsend, Adam, Birch, & Friedman, 2013). Numerous publications still state the need for more in-depth description of the actual experience of the clinical encounter to return SFs (Burke et al , 2013; Townsend, Adam, Birch, & Friedman, 2013). Numerous publications still state the need for more in-depth description of the actual experience of the clinical encounter to return SFs (Burke et al , 2013; Townsend, Adam, Birch, & Friedman, 2013). Numerous publications still state the need for more in-depth description of the actual experience of the clinical encounter to return SFs (Burke et al , 2013; Townsend, Adam, Birch, & Friedman, 2013). Numerous publications still state the need for more in-depth description of the actual experience of the clinical encounter to return SFs (Burke et al , 2013; Townsend, Adam, Birch, & Friedman, 2013). The first category of whether to return SFs was relevant to our results. The first category of whether to return SFs was relevant to our results. The first category of whether to return SFs was relevant to our results. The first category of whether to return SFs was relevant to our results. The first category of whether to return SFs was relevant to our results. The first was surprise, followed by problem-based coping about next steps. Discussing the emotions associated with surprise described by the interviewees that ranged from ‘very emotional to complete stoicism’ may help providers develop strategies to help the patient process emotions. Discussing the emotions associated with surprise described by the interviewees that ranged from ‘very emotional to complete stoicism’ may help providers develop strategies to help the patient process emotions. Discussing the emotions associated with surprise described by the interviewees that ranged from ‘very emotional to complete stoicism’ may help providers develop strategies to help the patient process emotions. Discussing the emotions associated with surprise described by the interviewees that ranged from ‘very emotional to complete stoicism’ may help providers develop strategies to help the patient process emotions. Problem-based coping after the emotional surprise of the SF was identified as the second stage of reactions by patients by the interviewees. Problem-based coping after the emotional surprise of the SF was identified as the second stage of reactions by patients by the interviewees. Preparation and strategies about these concerns and how to best help patients should be considered when delivering SFs. Paired with qualitative content analysis, qualitative description provides pragmatic yet meaningful answers to research questions by focusing on the facts presented and the use of participants' own words, without requiring reliance on preexisting frameworks and theories (McIntosh & Morse, 2015; Sandelowski, 2000). These findings are typically defined as the identification of gene variants that have health importance for an individual, discovered in the conduct of clinical sequencing but not related to the disease under investigation (Boardman & Hale, 2018). The principal investigator of the study (CR) conducted all of the telephone interviews (n = 21), which lasted between 20 and 40 min with a mean time of 32 min. After the transcripts were returned to the study team, a member checked for accuracy by reading the transcripts and listening to the recordings (CR). All original recordings were deleted within 2 weeks after the transcription was complete.A qualitative content analysis was conducted on the transcripts. The codes were then grouped into larger descriptive categories based on similarity of the data. We then returned to the transcripts and recontextualized the data for development of categories (Miles, Huberman, & Saldaña, 2014). A revised statement was published by ACMG in 2017 that changed the terminology of ‘incidental findings’ to ‘secondary findings’ because the list of genes were intentionally analyzed as opposed to found incidentally (Kalia et al , 2017). A revised statement was published by ACMG in 2017 that changed the terminology of ‘incidental findings’ to ‘secondary findings’ because the list of genes were intentionally analyzed as opposed to found incidentally (Kalia et al , 2017). The researchers also used the approach of reflexivity during the data analysis to limit personal bias into the interpretation (Baillie, 2015). The researchers also used the approach of reflexivity during the data analysis to limit personal bias into the interpretation (Baillie, 2015). Demographic data on participants are summarized in Table 2. If the patient remembered, then the genetic counselor asked the patient to recall what they remembered.When asked why this was the preferred strategy to begin the return of SFs, many interviewees stated it helped to structure the delivery of difficult news and gave a previous shared experience with the genetic counselor that helped the patient with acceptance of receiving the result. One participant stated it served as a type of ‘warning shot’. Reasons why this was a barrier in the return of SFs included (a) the importance of maintaining continuity in counseling with the family and (b) the ability of the counselor to better understand the patient's emotional ability to manage the information. One quotation that captured this perspective is:I think having a good grasp of the family's dynamics but understanding the situation and having a lot of pre-test consent was very helpful to prepare me for discussing these results. If I hadn't met with the family previously, or if someone else had done the testing and I was just in charge of the results, it would have been much more difficult for me to gauge how they would take this. Further, adding news of an SF with an impactful, significant primary result might overamplify the emotions of the patient. Further, adding news of an SF with an impactful, significant primary result might overamplify the emotions of the patient. A survey of genetic counselors reported that many genetic professionals are returning SFs, and this added responsibility has increased challenges to already complex and time-consuming counseling sessions (Smith, Douglas, Braxton, & Kramer, 2015). A survey of genetic counselors reported that many genetic professionals are returning SFs, and this added responsibility has increased challenges to already complex and time-consuming counseling sessions (Smith, Douglas, Braxton, & Kramer, 2015). During these situations, many of the interviewees strongly suggested two separate counseling sessions to deliver this information. During these situations, many of the interviewees strongly suggested two separate counseling sessions to deliver this information. During these situations, many of the interviewees strongly suggested two separate counseling sessions to deliver this information. That's one of those cases when you kind of look back and say this would be a scenario where if you had the time and they had the time that you would really do this in two visits. (Interviewee 13)If they did find a diagnosis for the proband, just maybe considering doing it as two separate sessions. Maybe focusing on the diagnosis for the proband, talking briefly about the secondary finding, but then explaining that they should probably come in for a second appointment to discuss this “cause it is a completely different issue from the diagnosis”. 