An unavoidable complication is the increase in pSMC1 and pChk1 levels irrespective of FdU treatment that reflects the essential role of ATR in signaling stalled replication brought on by the synchronization of cells in the presence of the replication inhibitor HU. First, we confirmed that, as was the case for HCT116 and HCT116 3−6 cells, phosphorylation of SMC1 and Chk1 in HeLaS3 cells occurred after 4, 8, or 12 h of continuous exposure to 0.25 μM FdU (Fig. Loss of MLH1, a subunit of MutLα, confers a twofold increase in resistance to cell killing by low doses of FdU and abrogates activation of the G2/M checkpoint. Loss of MLH1, a subunit of MutLα, confers a twofold increase in resistance to cell killing by low doses of FdU and abrogates activation of the G2/M checkpoint. Activation of ATR leads to phosphorylation of downstream checkpoint kinases Chk1 and SMC1. Our data suggest that MMR can act as a damage sensor in response to FdU triggering ATR-dependent cell cycle arrest and cell death. However, other pathways, particularly BER, also play prominent roles in the cellular response. Second, in the case of O6-methyl-G, the cell cycle arrest is delayed to the second cycle after exposure to SN1 alkylators whereas the observed G2/M arrest triggered by FdU is in the first cell cycle (Fig. Second, in the case of O6-methyl-G, the cell cycle arrest is delayed to the second cycle after exposure to SN1 alkylators whereas the observed G2/M arrest triggered by FdU is in the first cell cycle (Fig. Second, in the case of O6-methyl-G, the cell cycle arrest is delayed to the second cycle after exposure to SN1 alkylators whereas the observed G2/M arrest triggered by FdU is in the first cell cycle (Fig. Second, in the case of O6-methyl-G, the cell cycle arrest is delayed to the second cycle after exposure to SN1 alkylators whereas the observed G2/M arrest triggered by FdU is in the first cell cycle (Fig. 1; see also [Stojic et al , 2004; Meyers et al , 2005; Yoshioka et al , 2006]). Using gene-targeted cell lines deficient in one or both of the mammalian uracil-DNA glycosylases Smug1 and Ung, they demonstrated that the incorporation of FdU into DNA rather than the excision of uracil mediates cell killing. Finally, in vitro repair assays suggest that multiple BER enzymes may target FdU/G and FdU/A mispairs [Fischer et al , 2007]. Clinical studies to ascertain the influence of MSI status on overall survival and the efficacy of FU chemotherapy are equivocal. Clinical studies to ascertain the influence of MSI status on overall survival and the efficacy of FU chemotherapy are equivocal. While some studies point to the absence of survival benefit conferred by FU for MMR-deficient microsatellite instability high (MSI-H) colorectal cancer patients suggesting that loss of MMR confers resistance or tolerance to FU [Meyers et al , 2003; Ribic et al , 2003; Benatti et al , 2005; Popat et al , 2005; Jover et al , 2006], other studies find the opposite, that is increased survival among MSI-H patients treated with FU or find no difference ([Lamberti et al , 2007] and references cited within). Conclusions from such studies are potentially confounded by patient sample size, the overall improved survival of patients with MSI-H tumors compared to those with microsatellite-stable tumors observed in some though not all studies, the age of the patient population, and the possibly heterogeneous underpinnings of genomic instability. Conclusions from such studies are potentially confounded by patient sample size, the overall improved survival of patients with MSI-H tumors compared to those with microsatellite-stable tumors observed in some though not all studies, the age of the patient population, and the possibly heterogeneous underpinnings of genomic instability. Conclusions from such studies are potentially confounded by patient sample size, the overall improved survival of patients with MSI-H tumors compared to those with microsatellite-stable tumors observed in some though not all studies, the age of the patient population, and the possibly heterogeneous underpinnings of genomic instability. Our data and the work of other laboratories point to an important role for BER in both removing FdU from DNA and in promoting cell cycle arrest and cell death. Knowledge of the relative contributions of the MMR and BER pathways to both cell killing and DNA repair and temporal and dose thresholds at which each may compete or act synergistically may be very important in predicting the efficacy of 5-FU treatment for different patient populations. The MMR system has been implicated in cell killing by FPs as MMR-deficient cells exhibit increased survival after treatment with FdU [Meyers et al , 2004]. Treatment with a specific inhibitor of TS, Tomudex, elicits a G2 arrest regardless of MMR status suggesting that the contribution of MMR to DNA damage signaling is via incorporation of FPs into DNA as opposed to the inhibition of TS and the resulting imbalance in nucleotide pools. Treatment with a specific inhibitor of TS, Tomudex, elicits a G2 arrest regardless of MMR status suggesting that the contribution of MMR to DNA damage signaling is via incorporation of FPs into DNA as opposed to the inhibition of TS and the resulting imbalance in nucleotide pools. Treatment with a specific inhibitor of TS, Tomudex, elicits a G2 arrest regardless of MMR status suggesting that the contribution of MMR to DNA damage signaling is via incorporation of FPs into DNA as opposed to the inhibition of TS and the resulting imbalance in nucleotide pools. Treatment with a specific inhibitor of TS, Tomudex, elicits a G2 arrest regardless of MMR status suggesting that the contribution of MMR to DNA damage signaling is via incorporation of FPs into DNA as opposed to the inhibition of TS and the resulting imbalance in nucleotide pools. Since 15% of colorectal tumors exhibit microsatellite instability (MSI) and are presumed to be MMR-deficient, there is concern that this subset of patients might be particularly resistant to FU treatment. RECOMBINANT MUTSαHeterodimeric human MutSα (MSH2-His6-MSH6) was produced by coinfection (MOI = 10) of High Five (Invitrogen) maintained in Express Five (Invitrogen) with 18 mM glutamine (Invitrogen) at 27°C. MutSα was used within 1 week of purification. After 15 min at 25°C samples were loaded onto 4% native polyacrylamide gels in 0.5 × TBE. CELL CYCLE ANALYSESCell cycle distribution was determined by propidium iodide staining and flow cytometry (FCM). Cell cycle populations were quantified using ModFit LT version 3.0 software (Verity Software House, Topsham, ME). Cells were serially diluted (range, 2 × 102−2 × 104 cells/6−12 mm plate), plated in complete medium, and allowed to adhere for ∼15 h. FdU (0−7.5 μM) was then added to the medium for 10 days. The assay was performed according to the manufacturer's protocol (Trevigen, Gaithersburg, MD). Comet tail moment was analyzed as described [Liu et al , 2005]. Comet tail moment was analyzed as described [Liu et al , 2005]. Comet tail moment was analyzed as described [Liu et al , 2005]. MMR-MEDIATED CELL CYCLE ARREST IN RESPONSE TO FDUWe monitored cell cycle progression of MMR-proficient HCT116 3−6 and MMR-deficient HCT116 cells after treatment with a brief pulse of FdU. MMR-MEDIATED CELL CYCLE ARREST IN RESPONSE TO FDUWe monitored cell cycle progression of MMR-proficient HCT116 3−6 and MMR-deficient HCT116 cells after treatment with a brief pulse of FdU. After release from serum starvation, S-phase cells were exposed to varying concentrations of FdU for 2 h. Loss of MutLα led to a modest but reproducible increase in survival amounting to a roughly twofold decrease in the sensitivity of HCT116 cells (D30 = 5.0 μM) compared to HCT116 3−6 (D30 = 2.5 μM); D30 is the concentration of FdU that results in 30% survival (Fig. After release from serum starvation, S-phase cells were exposed to varying concentrations of FdU for 2 h. Loss of MutLα led to a modest but reproducible increase in survival amounting to a roughly twofold decrease in the sensitivity of HCT116 cells (D30 = 5.0 μM) compared to HCT116 3−6 (D30 = 2.5 μM); D30 is the concentration of FdU that results in 30% survival (Fig. MMR-DEPENDENT ACTIVATION OF THE ATR/CHK1 PATHWAY IN RESPONSE TO FDUDNA damage checkpoint signaling in response to FdU exposure was monitored by assessing the relative levels of phosphorylation of Chk1 and SMC1. MMR-DEPENDENT ACTIVATION OF THE ATR/CHK1 PATHWAY IN RESPONSE TO FDUDNA damage checkpoint signaling in response to FdU exposure was monitored by assessing the relative levels of phosphorylation of Chk1 and SMC1. 