Specifically, at end-isovolumic contraction, end-systole and end-isovolumic relaxation, we observed increasing angles relative to the annular plane for larger cinching steps. We also quantified minimum and maximum angles throughout the cardiac cycle; in Fig. Again qualitatively, the angular velocity profiles looked identical between baseline and all DeVega steps. Consistently, we found significant reductions in the magnitude of maximum and minimum angular velocities with successive annular cinching (Fig. We found that annular cinching resulted in qualitatively similar temporal evolutions of circumferential strains but with successively reduced magnitude (Fig. To simplify the observation to only a single time point in the cardiac cycle, refer to Fig. To simplify the observation to only a single time point in the cardiac cycle, refer to Fig. Relative to baseline, annular cinching did not result in significantly altered circumferential strains. Therefore, in the mitral valve, surgical repair via annuloplasty may further contribute to the already present disease-induced leaflet maladaptation and thus risk repair efficacy. Table 2 summarizes radial, circumferential, and areal strains for both the belly and free-edge region. Table 2 summarizes radial, circumferential, and areal strains for both the belly and free-edge region. Either way, mitral leaflets maladapt, at least in part, due to changes in their mechanical environment during disease or in response to annuloplasty.61 While there is currently no evidence for similar maladaptive mechanisms to disease and repair in the tricuspid valve, given similarities in structure, function, and resident cell phenotypes between the mitral and the tricuspid valve, it is likely that tricuspid valve leaflets show similar maladaptation in response to disease and/or repair. Another factor to consider is that anterior tricuspid valve leaflets are mechanically anisotropic, exhibiting stiffer circumferential behavior due to a mostly circumferential collagen orientation.1,20,24,34,40 Therefore, changes in loading from annuloplasty may affect the directional strains of the tissue differently. Changes in the mechanobiological equilibrium of soft tissues, such as tricuspid valve leaflet tissue, are known to drive compositional and configurational changes, e.g. Changes in the mechanobiological equilibrium of soft tissues, such as tricuspid valve leaflet tissue, are known to drive compositional and configurational changes, e.g. Changes in the mechanobiological equilibrium of soft tissues, such as tricuspid valve leaflet tissue, are known to drive compositional and configurational changes, e.g. Changes in the mechanobiological equilibrium of soft tissues, such as tricuspid valve leaflet tissue, are known to drive compositional and configurational changes, e.g. Changes in the mechanobiological equilibrium of soft tissues, such as tricuspid valve leaflet tissue, are known to drive compositional and configurational changes, e.g. growth and remodeling, to adapt to this altered environment.2,15,17 In fact, multiple studies have shown that pathological mechanical stimuli in heart valve leaflets, at least in part, increase valvular interstitial cell activation and collagen turnover, which may result in maladaptive leaflet changes.4,8,11,62 Therefore, we must consider that annuloplasty, by altering the mechanobiological equilibrium of the tissue (as shown in here), may elicit a biological response from these actively adapting leaflets.53 Given the sparsity of data on tricuspid valve growth and remodeling, we can only hypothesize how changes induced via annuloplasty may affect the leaflets. In fact, we have recently shown that suture annuloplasty in animals with biventricular heart failure-induced functional tricuspid regurgitation present with altered right ventricular mechanics and valvular competence.18 In our current work, we investigate whether tricuspid annuloplasty alters the mechanics of the tricuspid valve leaflets. While we used DeVega suture annuloplasty primarily as an experimental technique that allowed us to externally control degree of cinching, our data also reveal new information about the procedure itself. These data could be used to predict changes to the mechanobiological equilibrium of the leaflets, and thus, predict potential long-term effects that could affect repair durability. Additionally, it is important to note that we only analyzed the anterior leaflet and further studies would benefit from comparing the three leaflets of the tricuspid valve, especially because recent studies have noted microstructural and mechanical differences among leaflets.34 Lastly, our study utilized sonomicrometry which is an invasive technology and may alter the in-vivo mechanics of the valve and its leaflets. Furthermore, we have simplified our analysis to only four crystals and two regions in the anterior leaflet, which cannot capture the previously reported heterogeneous behavior of tricuspid valve leaflets.24 Furthermore, we have simplified our analysis to only four crystals and two regions in the anterior leaflet, which cannot capture the previously reported heterogeneous behavior of tricuspid valve leaflets.24 Furthermore, we have simplified our analysis to only four crystals and two regions in the anterior leaflet, which cannot capture the previously reported heterogeneous behavior of tricuspid valve leaflets.24 Furthermore, we have simplified our analysis to only four crystals and two regions in the anterior leaflet, which cannot capture the previously reported heterogeneous behavior of tricuspid valve leaflets.24 Furthermore, we have simplified our analysis to only four crystals and two regions in the anterior leaflet, which cannot capture the previously reported heterogeneous behavior of tricuspid valve leaflets.24 Specifically, annular cinching reduced the leaflet’s range of motion, reduced its opening and closing velocity, and reduced systolic strains. Especially, the latter finding is important as changes in tissue strain alter the leaflet’s resident cells’ mechanobiological equilibrium. Especially, the latter finding is important as changes in tissue strain alter the leaflet’s resident cells’ mechanobiological equilibrium. Especially, the latter finding is important as changes in tissue strain alter the leaflet’s resident cells’ mechanobiological equilibrium. Thus, we will take a step toward uncovering whether tricuspid valve repair may inadvertently contribute to tricuspid valve disease and thus, at least in part, explain the high rate of repair failure. To this end, we utilize our previously established kinematic framework in combination with sonomicrometry in sheep. To this end, we utilize our previously established kinematic framework in combination with sonomicrometry in sheep. We then performed a median sternotomy to expose the heart and prepared the animals for cardiopulmonary bypass. We repeated this cinching process four more times (DeVega2–5), thereby reducing annular size at each stage, see Fig. Leaflet MotionTo examine the motion of the anterior tricuspid valve leaflet we considered a radial line passing through the leaflet center. Leaflet MotionTo examine the motion of the anterior tricuspid valve leaflet we considered a radial line passing through the leaflet center. To this end, we fit a cubic spline through the mid-annular segment crystal, the mid-belly crystal, and the free-edge crystal, as well as a fourth crystal position, which we created by calculating the mean position of the two lateral crystals. Furthermore, we used these data to determine angular velocities using a finite-difference scheme. We used the partial derivatives of the shape functions delineated above to compute the covariant basis vectors in the reference and spatial configurations, Temporal AveragingAs heart rates varied between animals we aligned temporal evolutions of all quantities of interest by first dividing them into four distinct segments: end-diastole to end-isovolumic contraction, end-isovolumic contraction to end-systole, end-systole to end-isovolumic relaxation, and end-isovolumic contraction to end-diastole of the next cardiac cycle. Next, we normalized the duration of each segment, linearly interpolated crystal locations throughout each segment, averaged those segments between animals, and re-assembled the average segments into an average temporal curve. 