In humans, a recent study delineated seven cytoarchitectonically distinct areas within the IPL (Caspers et al , 2006, 2008). In humans, a recent study delineated seven cytoarchitectonically distinct areas within the IPL (Caspers et al , 2006, 2008). 3A).To establish the reference distribution for the mean trace density F-ST, we used a randomisation procedure. These random trace densities were then averaged to yield an estimate for the mean trace density of a random set of the same number of voxels in the same distance as the termination zone. As this mean trace density was computed from a voxel that were matched with those constituting the termination zone in terms of distance along the tracts, it reflects an at-chance trace density in the same range. As this mean trace density was computed from a voxel that were matched with those constituting the termination zone in terms of distance along the tracts, it reflects an at-chance trace density in the same range. As this mean trace density was computed from a voxel that were matched with those constituting the termination zone in terms of distance along the tracts, it reflects an at-chance trace density in the same range. As this mean trace density was computed from a voxel that were matched with those constituting the termination zone in terms of distance along the tracts, it reflects an at-chance trace density in the same range. This procedure of drawing the same number of samples and consecutive averaging of the trace counts observed for these (random but matched) voxels was repeated 106 times yielding (due to the central limit theorem) a normal distribution for the mean trace density in the termination zone. This procedure of drawing the same number of samples and consecutive averaging of the trace counts observed for these (random but matched) voxels was repeated 106 times yielding (due to the central limit theorem) a normal distribution for the mean trace density in the termination zone. This procedure of drawing the same number of samples and consecutive averaging of the trace counts observed for these (random but matched) voxels was repeated 106 times yielding (due to the central limit theorem) a normal distribution for the mean trace density in the termination zone. This procedure of drawing the same number of samples and consecutive averaging of the trace counts observed for these (random but matched) voxels was repeated 106 times yielding (due to the central limit theorem) a normal distribution for the mean trace density in the termination zone. We thus evaluated the mean number of traces between seed and target (termination zone) against a reference distribution reflecting the by-chance distribution of mean trace counts in such set of voxels at the same distance from the seed. Note, that even though this assessment was based on a reference distribution, no inference was sought at this stage. A Z-score of 0 indicates that it is equally likely to find a higher or a lower mean trace density at that distance by chance. A positive Z-score points towards a termination zone that receives more traces than expected by chance in the same distance from the seed. Instead, it implements a reference distribution of how many trace counts could be expected by chance at a given distance and describes the observed effects relative to this reference.Consistency of these findings across subjects was then tested for by means of one-sample T-tests performed separately for each seed-target combination (p<0.001; Bonferroni-corrected for multiple comparisons). Different target areas were grouped into anatomically and functionally defined groups to test for differences in anatomical connectivity from IPL seed areas to cortical regions involved in different functional systems. The remaining two are located in the Sylvian fissure. 10 adopted from Schmahmann and Pandya (2006), with minor changes according to Felleman and Van Essen (1991) and Luppino et al  (1993).Results depicted in the figure and within the text of the Discussion were derived from the following publications on IPL connectivity of macaque cortex: Pandya and Seltzer (1982), Petrides and Pandya (1984), Cavada and Goldman-Rakic (1989a,b), Andersen et al  (1990), Neal et al  (1990a,b), Felleman and Van Essen (1991), Luppino et al  (1993), Lewis and Van Essen (2000), Matelli and Luppino (2001), Zhong and Rockland (2003), Gregoriou et al  (2006), Rozzi et al  (2006), Schmahmann and Pandya (2006), Petrides and Pandya (2009) as well as the CoCoMac database (http://www.cocomac.org; Stephan et al , 2001).The parcellation scheme of the macaque IPL as referred to in the Discussion of the present manuscript was adopted from today’s most widely used parcellation of Pandya and Seltzer (1982). 10 adopted from Schmahmann and Pandya (2006), with minor changes according to Felleman and Van Essen (1991) and Luppino et al  (1993).Results depicted in the figure and within the text of the Discussion were derived from the following publications on IPL connectivity of macaque cortex: Pandya and Seltzer (1982), Petrides and Pandya (1984), Cavada and Goldman-Rakic (1989a,b), Andersen et al  (1990), Neal et al  (1990a,b), Felleman and Van Essen (1991), Luppino et al  (1993), Lewis and Van Essen (2000), Matelli and Luppino (2001), Zhong and Rockland (2003), Gregoriou et al  (2006), Rozzi et al  (2006), Schmahmann and Pandya (2006), Petrides and Pandya (2009) as well as the CoCoMac database (http://www.cocomac.org; Stephan et al , 2001).The parcellation scheme of the macaque IPL as referred to in the Discussion of the present manuscript was adopted from today’s most widely used parcellation of Pandya and Seltzer (1982). They predominantly follow the course of the superior longitudinal (SLF) and arcuate fascicles (AF). The visually apparent shift of predominant connectivity patterns from rostral to caudal IPL areas is also well supported by the statistical analysis. The visually apparent shift of predominant connectivity patterns from rostral to caudal IPL areas is also well supported by the statistical analysis. 1B), the other two in the Sylvian fissure. Caudal IPL areas PGa and PGp had more consistent connections with intraparietal, superior parietal, posterior insular, lateral occipital and auditory areas in the left hemisphere, whereas more likely connections with posterior temporal, temporo-occipital, and inferior frontal areas existed within the right hemisphere. Caudal IPL areas PGa and PGp had more consistent connections with intraparietal, superior parietal, posterior insular, lateral occipital and auditory areas in the left hemisphere, whereas more likely connections with posterior temporal, temporo-occipital, and inferior frontal areas existed within the right hemisphere. The fingerprint of area PFm in the centre of the IPL showed a balanced connectivity to the parietal-sensorimotor and the temporal group. The fingerprint of area PFm in the centre of the IPL showed a balanced connectivity to the parietal-sensorimotor and the temporal group. The fingerprint of area PFm in the centre of the IPL showed a balanced connectivity to the parietal-sensorimotor and the temporal group. Where meaningfully possible, groups were further subdivided with respect to functional systems (e.g. motor, primary and secondary somatosensory, early and higher visual, auditory) based on knowledge from neuroimaging, lesion data, and non-human primates. Such analysis for different groups of targets provided information about the involvement of the IPL seed areas in different functional systems. Such analysis for different groups of targets provided information about the involvement of the IPL seed areas in different functional systems. 9, first two rows). 9, first two rows). A similar, though less pronounced pattern was seen for the superior parietal cortex while the anterior intraparietal sulcus (Choi et al , 2006; Scheperjans et al , 2008a,b) featured an abrupt drop in connection likelihood from the anterior PF- to the posterior PG-areas.The posterior insula (Kurth et al , 2010), in contrast, showed an increase in connection likelihood from rostral to caudal IPL seed areas. Behrens et al , 2003a; Rushworth et al , 2006; Uddin et al , 2010). Like probabilistic tractography for fibre paths, probabilistic atlases accommodate inter-subject variability and hence allow inclusion of uncertainty estimates into the investigation. Some regions, however, were covered in a more coarse fashion than others due to the current limitation of available atlases. Areas 46v, 46d, 8A, 8B, and 9 of the macaque prefrontal cortex show a differential connection pattern with the IPL areas (see discussion below). Thus, Hua et al  (2009) also used a priori anatomical knowledge for definition of regions of interest. Thus, Hua et al  (2009) also used a priori anatomical knowledge for definition of regions of interest. Thus, Hua et al  (2009) also used a priori anatomical knowledge for definition of regions of interest. Thus, Hua et al  (2009) also used a priori anatomical knowledge for definition of regions of interest. Thus, Hua et al  (2009) also used a priori anatomical knowledge for definition of regions of interest. Connectivity patterns of macaque IPL areas and homology considerationsThe overall pattern revealed by our results bears close resemblance to the axonal connection patterns found in tracer studies on macaques (Fig. Connectivity patterns of macaque IPL areas and homology considerationsThe overall pattern revealed by our results bears close resemblance to the axonal connection patterns found in tracer studies on macaques (Fig. Interestingly, cytoarchitectonic features of this region also share characteristics of rostral and caudal IPL areas (Caspers et al , 2006). Whereas for macaques no connections between IPL and primary and secondary visual areas V1 and V2 were observed, the results of our present study suggest such fibre tracts in humans. Higher visual areas as V3 and V4 connect to caudal IPL areas in the macaque whereas in humans connections are also found with the more rostral IPL (e.g., for targets OLatSup, OLatInf). This suspicion is strengthened by the notion that caudal rather than rostral IPL areas are primarily involved in visual processing (cf. Mountcastle et al , 1975; Hyvärinen, 1982 in macaques; e.g., Fink et al , 2001 in humans). On the other hand, however, a recent meta-analysis indicated that rostral IPL areas and higher visual areas are conjointly recruited by action observation (Caspers et al , 2010), matching the existence of mirror neurons in the rostral IPL of macaques (Rizzolatti, 2005). On the other hand, however, a recent meta-analysis indicated that rostral IPL areas and higher visual areas are conjointly recruited by action observation (Caspers et al , 2010), matching the existence of mirror neurons in the rostral IPL of macaques (Rizzolatti, 2005). In contrast, DTI is particularly prone to false positives due to limited resolution and limited specificity. Nevertheless, a recent study demonstrated nonexisting connections between IPL and anterior prefrontal regions in macaques (Petrides and Pandya, 2007) . Whereas all but the rostral-most IPL area were found to connect with the superior frontal gyrus, mainly caudal areas of the macaque IPL seemed to project to superior frontal areas 8B and 9. Whereas all but the rostral-most IPL area were found to connect with the superior frontal gyrus, mainly caudal areas of the macaque IPL seemed to project to superior frontal areas 8B and 9. Whereas all but the rostral-most IPL area were found to connect with the superior frontal gyrus, mainly caudal areas of the macaque IPL seemed to project to superior frontal areas 8B and 9. Whereas all but the rostral-most IPL area were found to connect with the superior frontal gyrus, mainly caudal areas of the macaque IPL seemed to project to superior frontal areas 8B and 9. The same holds true for the extrastriate visual areas V2–V5 which in the macaque are located within the lunate sulcus and on the prelunate gyrus, bringing them close to the caudal end of the IPL (Kaas, 2006; Ungerleider and Haxby, 1994), whereas in humans these areas are located more caudo-ventrally (ventral visual stream) and caudo-dorsally (dorsal visual stream) (Amunts et al , 2000; Malikovic et al , 2007; Rottschy et al , 2007). Such an approach provides a complementary approach to the connectivity-based parcellation used by Mars et al  (2011). Such an approach provides a complementary approach to the connectivity-based parcellation used by Mars et al  (2011). This supported the notion of a differential involvement of IPL areas in functional cortical networks which was already assumed based on electrophysiological recordings from different parts of macaque IPL (Hyvärinen, 1982; Mountcastle et al , 1975; Seltzer and Pandya, 1984). This view is supported by human DTI studies highlighting vPMC to rostral IPL connections (Rushworth et al , 2006; Tomassini et al , 2007) and a study by Kelly et al  (2010) on resting-state co-activation pattern of Broca’s region, and more specifically by a recent macaque study of Petrides and Pandya (2009) showing differential connections from rostral IPL to different vPMC areas. PFt furthermore co-activated with SI, superior parietal and posterior temporal regions. PFt furthermore co-activated with SI, superior parietal and posterior temporal regions. The present study demonstrated that indeed rostral IPL areas showed consistent connections with Broca’s region. The present study demonstrated that indeed rostral IPL areas showed consistent connections with Broca’s region. Based on the results of the present study, we would argue that the connections between rostral IPL and areas relevant within this potential mirror neuron network are more consistently expressed within the left hemisphere. Based on the results of the present study, we would argue that the connections between rostral IPL and areas relevant within this potential mirror neuron network are more consistently expressed within the left hemisphere. Based on the results of the present study, we would argue that the connections between rostral IPL and areas relevant within this potential mirror neuron network are more consistently expressed within the left hemisphere. Based on the results of the present study, we would argue that the connections between rostral IPL and areas relevant within this potential mirror neuron network are more consistently expressed within the left hemisphere. Findings of bilateral or right-lateralized activations within IPL might demonstrate that functional demands and the specific experimental context might be at least as important in determining functional recruitment as the structural basis of anatomical connections.Within the language network, areas of the (left) caudal IPL, corresponding to Geschwind’s area (Geschwind, 1970), have been related to semantic and phonological processing, especially during reading (Price, 2000; Vigneau et al , 2006). Geschwind (1965,1970) not only highlighted the aspect of reading to be located within rostral parts of the angular gyrus, but furthermore stressed that this left IPL hub would integrate visual and auditory word forms to generate speech (Price, 2000). Material and methods The predominant connections to both auditory and higher visual areas in the left hemisphere, as found in the present study, might support the notion that these areas integrate these different modalities for semantic or phonological processing, independent from input modality.But the leftward asymmetry of connections of the caudal IPL areas also comprises connections to superior parietal and intraparietal areas. During more complex processing steps such as calculation, the left caudal IPL is strongly involved as well (Dehaene et al , 1998; Fias et al , 2003; Nieder, 2005; Ansari, 2008; Dehaene, 2009) . With the predominance of left hemispheric connections to the intraparietal and superior parietal areas found in the present study, caudal IPL area PGa might reflect the relevant part of the angular gyrus which is involved in number processing. This network involves IPL, posterior temporal and inferior/middle frontal areas. This network involves IPL, posterior temporal and inferior/middle frontal areas. This network involves IPL, posterior temporal and inferior/middle frontal areas. Based on this fibre tract pattern which matches the co-activation pattern of respective functional studies (Corbetta and Shulman, 2002; Corbetta et al , 2008), it can be assumed that especially areas PFm and PGa play an important role in the ventral attention network, possibly in combination with caudal most area PGp. The diffusion sensitive gradients were distributed along 60 directions in an icosahedral scheme (Jones et al , 1999). The diffusion sensitive gradients were distributed along 60 directions in an icosahedral scheme (Jones et al , 1999). The diffusion sensitive gradients were distributed along 60 directions in an icosahedral scheme (Jones et al , 1999). A scanning protocol with special focus on quality protection of the data was applied, in particular with respect to the prevention of head motion. Quality of scanning in general was checked by routinely applied phantom measurements with retrieval of signal and noise change measures within the acquired images and the background to assure stability of the scanning protocol over time. But due to a scanning protocol with focus on optimal acquisition of high quality data, only one data set had to be removed from further analysis, leaving 39 data sets which showed minimal motion and no other artefacts for consecutive analysis. The CSF-segment obtained from segmentation of the individual b = 0 images was used as exclusion mask for probabilistic tractography to avoid tracts passing through ventricles or sulci. Statistical analysisStatistical analysis was performed using MATLAB (The Math-Works). Rostral IPL areas in this species have been shown to contain mirror neurons and participate in sensorimotor processing, whereas caudal areas are mainly involved in functions such as spatial attention, auditory-sensory integration, and visuo-motor coordination, e.g., grasping (Hyvärinen, 1982; Pandya and Seltzer, 1982; Seltzer and Pandya, 1984; Rozzi et al , 2006). Rostral IPL areas in this species have been shown to contain mirror neurons and participate in sensorimotor processing, whereas caudal areas are mainly involved in functions such as spatial attention, auditory-sensory integration, and visuo-motor coordination, e.g., grasping (Hyvärinen, 1982; Pandya and Seltzer, 1982; Seltzer and Pandya, 1984; Rozzi et al , 2006). Algorithmically, voxels forming this termination zone were identified using a stepwise threshold decrease. 