Notably, the tocopherol metabolite, γ-carboxyethyl hydroxychroman, a COX-2 inhibitor but poor scavenger (29), also decreased the frequency of aneuploidy (Fig. E. faecalis Activates DNA Damage Responses and G2 ArrestWe noted that HCT116 and RKO cells developed megalocytosis following exposure to E. faecalis (data not shown). ATM (ataxia telangiectasia mutated) and ATR (ATM and Rad3-related) are kinases that initiate DNA damage response signal transduction cascades (31). ATM (ataxia telangiectasia mutated) and ATR (ATM and Rad3-related) are kinases that initiate DNA damage response signal transduction cascades (31). 2A), phosphorylation of Cdk1 at Tyr15 failed to increase (Fig. Nocodazole-treated cells, in contrast, showed a 5-fold increase by 24 hrs. This provided evidence that the spindle-assembly checkpoint was not activated by E. faecalis. 2D), and partially rescued cells from E. faecalis-induced G2 arrest (Supplementary Fig. 2D), and partially rescued cells from E. faecalis-induced G2 arrest (Supplementary Fig. 2D), and partially rescued cells from E. faecalis-induced G2 arrest (Supplementary Fig. Finally, caffeine decreased the percentage (± SD) of cells positive for γH2AX (E. faecalis vs. E. faecalis with 2.5 mM caffeine: 43.4 ± 0.5 vs. 20.2 ± 1.8 for HCT116 cells, and 79.2 ± 0.2 vs. 67.4 ± 0.4 for RKO cells; P < 0.01 for both comparisons). Finally, caffeine decreased the percentage (± SD) of cells positive for γH2AX (E. faecalis vs. E. faecalis with 2.5 mM caffeine: 43.4 ± 0.5 vs. 20.2 ± 1.8 for HCT116 cells, and 79.2 ± 0.2 vs. 67.4 ± 0.4 for RKO cells; P < 0.01 for both comparisons). Compared to E. faecalis alone, MnSOD partially protected against γH2AX formation in HCT116 cells at 0 hrs, but not 24 hrs (Fig. Compared to E. faecalis alone, MnSOD partially protected against γH2AX formation in HCT116 cells at 0 hrs, but not 24 hrs (Fig. Compared to E. faecalis alone, MnSOD partially protected against γH2AX formation in HCT116 cells at 0 hrs, but not 24 hrs (Fig. Compared to E. faecalis alone, MnSOD partially protected against γH2AX formation in HCT116 cells at 0 hrs, but not 24 hrs (Fig. Compared to E. faecalis alone, MnSOD partially protected against γH2AX formation in HCT116 cells at 0 hrs, but not 24 hrs (Fig. Catalase, however, prevented the formation of γH2AX foci, suggesting that the spontaneous dismutation of superoxide to H2O2 generated most of the DNA damage in these cells. Catalase, however, prevented the formation of γH2AX foci, suggesting that the spontaneous dismutation of superoxide to H2O2 generated most of the DNA damage in these cells. Catalase, however, prevented the formation of γH2AX foci, suggesting that the spontaneous dismutation of superoxide to H2O2 generated most of the DNA damage in these cells. A similar set of responses was found with increased aneuploidy and tetraploidy, γH2AX formation, decreased γH2AX foci following treatment with MnSOD and catalase, and G2 arrest (Supplementary Fig. This finding is consistent with other work by us showing activated macrophages produce clastogens that damage epithelial cells via a mechanism analogous to the radiation-induced bystander effect (9,13). This finding is consistent with other work by us showing activated macrophages produce clastogens that damage epithelial cells via a mechanism analogous to the radiation-induced bystander effect (9,13). This finding is consistent with other work by us showing activated macrophages produce clastogens that damage epithelial cells via a mechanism analogous to the radiation-induced bystander effect (9,13). This finding is consistent with other work by us showing activated macrophages produce clastogens that damage epithelial cells via a mechanism analogous to the radiation-induced bystander effect (9,13). The production of clastogens by E. faecalis-infected macrophages is analogous to the induction of CIN through the radiation-induced bystander effect (13). Cells were synchronized in G1 by double thymidine block and exposed to E. faecalis-infected macrophages at an MOI of 1,000. The percentage of cells in G2/M was significantly increased at 48 hrs (8.0 ± 0.1) and 72 hrs (9.6 ± 0.5) compared to cells exposed to uninfected macrophages. The percentage of cells in G2/M was significantly increased at 48 hrs (8.0 ± 0.1) and 72 hrs (9.6 ± 0.5) compared to cells exposed to uninfected macrophages. The percentage of cells in G2/M was significantly increased at 48 hrs (8.0 ± 0.1) and 72 hrs (9.6 ± 0.5) compared to cells exposed to uninfected macrophages. As previously shown for cells directly exposed to E. faecalis (Fig. 2C), phosphorylation of Cdk1 at Tyr15 was evident at baseline and did not increase following exposure to E. faecalis-infected macrophages. 2C), phosphorylation of Cdk1 at Tyr15 was evident at baseline and did not increase following exposure to E. faecalis-infected macrophages. 2C), phosphorylation of Cdk1 at Tyr15 was evident at baseline and did not increase following exposure to E. faecalis-infected macrophages. A G2/M arrest, however, was only noted for HCT116 cells (Fig. A G2/M arrest, however, was only noted for HCT116 cells (Fig. A G2/M arrest, however, was only noted for HCT116 cells (Fig. Intestinal commensals are potential important contributors to the development of sporadic human colorectal cancer (CRC), but the identification of relevant microorganisms has been impeded by the complex ecology of the large intestine (1,2). The bystander effect has been shown to occur in vivo in congenic sex-mismatch bone marrow transplantation experiments (14). These showed that the bystander effect can activate ATM and ATR, generate γH2AX foci and, for HCT116 cells, induce a G2/M arrest. Although causative mediators are not characterized, the bystander effect is associated with COX-2 and DNA damaging products from this inflammatory pathway may be important (9,15,16). There was no histological evidence for inflammation or mucosal abnormality in control or E. faecalis-exposed mice. E. faecalis infection of macrophages produced a bystander effect that resulted in γH2AX deposition, cell cycle arrest, and CIN. E. faecalis infection of macrophages produced a bystander effect that resulted in γH2AX deposition, cell cycle arrest, and CIN. E. faecalis infection of macrophages produced a bystander effect that resulted in γH2AX deposition, cell cycle arrest, and CIN. E. faecalis infection of macrophages produced a bystander effect that resulted in γH2AX deposition, cell cycle arrest, and CIN. E. faecalis-induced G2 arrest was partially ameliorated by MnSOD and indicated that superoxide can act as a cyclomodulin. Cell cycle arrest during G2 was confirmed by the persistence of cyclin B1 and lack of accumulation of cells in mitosis. These findings occurred through a bystander effect and provide a mechanism by which redox-active intestinal commensals may contribute to cellular transformation and tumorigenesis. COX-2 contributes to both the radiation- and macrophage-induced bystander effect (9,15,16), although mechanisms are unclear. The results reported here show that the macrophage-induced bystander effect can rapidly induce aneuploidy and tetraploidy in colonic epithelial cells. Several potential mediators for the bystander effect include tumor necrosis factor-alpha and breakdown products of polyunsaturated fatty acids such as 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (47,48), although no single agent has been definitively shown to be causative. The latter is analogous to the radiation-induced bystander effect (13). The latter is analogous to the radiation-induced bystander effect (13). Among healthy adults, E. faecalis varies in concentration in feces from <105 to 108 cfu per gram (22). This strain was grown in brain-heart infusion (Difco) at 37°C and washed in PBS with the multiplicity of infection (MOI) defined as bacterial cfu per cultured cell. MnSOD was purchased from Roche (Indianapolis, IN) and additional reagents from Sigma unless otherwise specified. Experiments with the dual-chamber co-culture system were carried out as previously described (9). Following 24 hr incubation, cells were fixed with 2% paraformaldehyde and stained with propidium iodide. Following 24 hr incubation, cells were fixed with 2% paraformaldehyde and stained with propidium iodide. using fluorescent microscopy according to previously described criteria (23). FACS Analysis for A neuploidy and TetraploidyPloidy was determined by FACS analysis as previously described (24). Phosphorylation of histone H3 is a marker of chromosome condensation and mitosis. Phosphorylation of histone H3 is a marker of chromosome condensation and mitosis. Cells were secondarily stained with the Alexa Fluor® 488 F(ab')2 fragment of goat anti-mouse IgG (H+L) (1:1000 dilution, Invitrogen) and propidium iodine. Data were analyzed using ModFit LT (Verity Software House, Topsham, ME). Phosphorylated-ATM (Ser1981), p-ATR (Ser428), p-Chk1 (Ser345), p-Chk2 (Ser33/35) and p-Cdk1 (Tyr15) monoclonal antibodies and polyclonal anti-cyclin B1 antibody were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology. Care was taken to preserve blood flow with no ischemia observed in the colons of 24 mice previously studied using this protocol (27). γH2AX-positive cells were identified by laser scanning confocal microscopy (Leica Microsystems, Bannockburn, IL) or enumerated by FACSCalibur and analyzed using Summit software (v4.3, DAKO, Carpinteria, CA).Epitope retrieval of paraffin-embedded colon sections was done using a pressurized decloaking chamber (Biocare Medical, LLC). Slides were scored for γH2AX in a blinded fashion by one of us (S.L.) Experimental and control groups in ploidy assays were compared by chi-square and the number of positive nuclei in colon biopsies by the student's t test. This phenotype is rare among bacteria and known to damage colonic epithelial DNA (6). This phenotype is rare among bacteria and known to damage colonic epithelial DNA (6). Approximately 10% of untreated mitotic HCT116 cells were non-diploid with a DNA content greater or less than 4N (Fig. 