Figure 5A shows C-peptide signal area as the total load (volume) on the column progressively increases for standard solution of 10ng/mL (r2=.998; y=0.99+0.0013, in dimensionless form). PrecisionIntra-assay CVs were found to be in the range 2.0-3.7%. An ion-exchange chromatographic method has been developed for C-peptide isolation and further analysis by LC-MS. In order to achieve higher specificity, we monitored two transitions for C-peptide fragmentation simultaneously in the MRM mode. In order to achieve higher specificity, we monitored two transitions for C-peptide fragmentation simultaneously in the MRM mode. In order to achieve higher specificity, we monitored two transitions for C-peptide fragmentation simultaneously in the MRM mode. ReagentsC-peptide fragment 3–33, synthetic analogue of native peptide, unlabeled (Mr 3017) - was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO); isotopically labeled [2H8-Val7,10] C-peptide was from Bachem (Bubendorf, Switzerland).A laboratory synthesized peptide which contained 14 residues labeled with 13C and 15N, H3N-EA*EDL*QV*GQV*EL*G*G*G*PG**A*GSL*QPL*A*L*EGSLQ-COOH, was provided by Dr. Daniel Stein from Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY. ReagentsC-peptide fragment 3–33, synthetic analogue of native peptide, unlabeled (Mr 3017) - was obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO); isotopically labeled [2H8-Val7,10] C-peptide was from Bachem (Bubendorf, Switzerland).A laboratory synthesized peptide which contained 14 residues labeled with 13C and 15N, H3N-EA*EDL*QV*GQV*EL*G*G*G*PG**A*GSL*QPL*A*L*EGSLQ-COOH, was provided by Dr. Daniel Stein from Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY. Sample pretreatmentFrozen plasma samples were mixed with methanol (up to 1 to 4 ratio, v/v), then subjected to centrifugation (5 min at 12g) to remove precipitated proteins. For purification using cation exchangers (HiTrap SP cartridges and MonoS, GE Healthcare), the pH of the sample was adjusted with formate ammonium buffer (50mM, pH3.7). For purification using cation exchangers (HiTrap SP cartridges and MonoS, GE Healthcare), the pH of the sample was adjusted with formate ammonium buffer (50mM, pH3.7). At the same time the isoforms of C-peptide were monitored in SIM mode. At the same time the isoforms of C-peptide were monitored in SIM mode. At the same time the isoforms of C-peptide were monitored in SIM mode. Prior to the MRM transition experiments we acquired mass spectra for two commercially available synthesized C-peptides from Sigma-Aldrich and Bachem. More generally, the approach can be applied to any substance containing so-called ionogenic groups participating in acid-base equilbria. The method contains some intrinsic limitations primarily connected with the idealized dissociation scheme used [18], when the dissociation process assumed to be independent for any ionogenic group involved and the dissociation constant values are taken as they are reported for single amino acids. It is generally assumed that a charged protein is effectively retained by the ion exchanger of the opposite sign charge, however there is some experimental evidence of deviation from this simple rule (see [20], for example); this could be explained by electrostatic interactions of higher orders as well as possible hydrophobic interactions.The charge versus pH curve, or so-called “titration curve” for the C-peptide is shown in Fig.1. The nature of C-peptide is quite specific: the sequence does not contain any amino acid residues with side chains capable of contributing to a positive charge. Thus, there exists only one basic group in the peptide. Applying a starting solution with a pH slightly above the C-peptide isoelectric point to a cation exchanger will allow C-peptide to pass through the column while trapping most of impurities. For the ion exchange purification stage, the pH range 3.5-4 was initially selected based on the theoretical predictions. The first series of experiments were quite successful, despite the fact that the method of theoretical modeling in general can be considered only approximation [16].The general scheme of C-peptide analysis included methanol precipitation as an initial stage to reduce the amount of ballast proteins. Here the total ion count is shown in selected ion monitoring mode for a sample treated with a cation exchanger and untreated (Figure 2A and Figure 2B, respectively). We observed that it is impossible to perform the UF procedure for a non-treated sample as the dialysis membrane (10KD cutoff and lower) soon becomes clogged. We observed that it is impossible to perform the UF procedure for a non-treated sample as the dialysis membrane (10KD cutoff and lower) soon becomes clogged. This phenomenon can potentially prevent accurate quantitation and should be addressed in the future research.In Figure 4, the mass spectra are shown for purified and concentrated C-peptide from a human serum sample. SIM shows a high intensity peak corresponding to the C-peptide (1007.7) in the first upper panel; the second panel shows the Bachem isotopically labeled synthesized analogue (1013.0).To ensure the proper identification of C-peptide, we also monitored the MRM transition for two fragments (1007.7-147.2 and 1007.7-927.8). 