There was however, no convincing evidence that mRNA expression of LC3 and CTGF tracked with TGFβ or TNFα. There was however, no convincing evidence that mRNA expression of LC3 and CTGF tracked with TGFβ or TNFα. As a control for our experiments, we constructed an LC3 transcript in which the ARM was mutated with an arginine to glutamine (LC3-R/Q) substitution that neutralized the positive charge, and that greatly reduced ARE binding activity. The mutant LC3 protein was stable and formed a doublet at 16kDa, but it appeared somewhat different from the WT protein in that the upper band was more intense than the lower band and it was also shifted slightly downward. For example, the c-Myc transcript, has an ARE known to be an mRNA stability element, but LC3 does not regulate translation of c-Myc mRNA. In the future, these functions could be assessed in the HT1080 cells transfected with LC3. In the future, these functions could be assessed in the HT1080 cells transfected with LC3. In the future, these functions could be assessed in the HT1080 cells transfected with LC3. Interestingly, loss of function of LC3 in a knockout mouse reported by our group, has no autophagy phenotype (Cann et al , 2008). Interestingly, loss of function of LC3 in a knockout mouse reported by our group, has no autophagy phenotype (Cann et al , 2008). More recent studies have shown that fibronectin interaction with α5β1 (Aguirre-Ghiso et al , 2003) as well as α3β1 integrins increases tumor cell growth, as well as invasion by activating MMP-9 and Rac1 (Wei et al , 2007). More recent studies have shown that fibronectin interaction with α5β1 (Aguirre-Ghiso et al , 2003) as well as α3β1 integrins increases tumor cell growth, as well as invasion by activating MMP-9 and Rac1 (Wei et al , 2007). More recent studies have shown that fibronectin interaction with α5β1 (Aguirre-Ghiso et al , 2003) as well as α3β1 integrins increases tumor cell growth, as well as invasion by activating MMP-9 and Rac1 (Wei et al , 2007). More recent studies have shown that fibronectin interaction with α5β1 (Aguirre-Ghiso et al , 2003) as well as α3β1 integrins increases tumor cell growth, as well as invasion by activating MMP-9 and Rac1 (Wei et al , 2007). Hence, the context is clearly important, and suggests that in response to LC3, coordinate regulation of genes at the transcriptional and post-transcriptional level may be necessary to produce the FN-dependent proliferative and invasive responses. Hence, the context is clearly important, and suggests that in response to LC3, coordinate regulation of genes at the transcriptional and post-transcriptional level may be necessary to produce the FN-dependent proliferative and invasive responses. Hence, the context is clearly important, and suggests that in response to LC3, coordinate regulation of genes at the transcriptional and post-transcriptional level may be necessary to produce the FN-dependent proliferative and invasive responses. Hence, the context is clearly important, and suggests that in response to LC3, coordinate regulation of genes at the transcriptional and post-transcriptional level may be necessary to produce the FN-dependent proliferative and invasive responses. Hence, the context is clearly important, and suggests that in response to LC3, coordinate regulation of genes at the transcriptional and post-transcriptional level may be necessary to produce the FN-dependent proliferative and invasive responses. While it is possible that LC3 increases CTGF mRNA by increasing mRNA stability, the dependence of enhanced CTGF expression on FN, suggests an indirect effect of LC3. In addition, it would be of interest to further investigate whether LC3-mediated enhanced synthesis of FN can, by inducing integrin linked kinase (ILK), mediate transcriptional activity of factors upstream of the CTGF promoter, such as AP1 (Troussard et al , 2000; Troussard et al , 1999). Further prospective phenotyping studies and confirmation of the microarray data by qRT-PCR are necessary to indicate whether these factors could serve as important new biomarkers. While there is no obvious coordinate expression of these cytokines with CTGF and LC3, it would be interesting to establish in future prospective studies, whether the subset of tumors with the increase in LC3 and CTGF have a cytokine signature. While there is no obvious coordinate expression of these cytokines with CTGF and LC3, it would be interesting to establish in future prospective studies, whether the subset of tumors with the increase in LC3 and CTGF have a cytokine signature. While there is no obvious coordinate expression of these cytokines with CTGF and LC3, it would be interesting to establish in future prospective studies, whether the subset of tumors with the increase in LC3 and CTGF have a cytokine signature. The pCR3-LC3 expression plasmid was kindly supplied by Dr. J. Hammarback, Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, Wake Forest (Bowman Gray) School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, and was generated and characterized as previously described (Mann and Hammarback, 1994). The polyclonal antibodies to LC3 were either supplied by J. Hammarback or made to the same N-terminal sequence by AnaSpec Inc. (San Jose, CA). 18-mer RNA oligonucleotides containing either the wild type consensus sequence in bold (ACCUGUUAUUUAUCAAUU) of the AU-rich element (ARE) of the FN mRNA, or the non-ARE irrelevant consensus sequence (AGAGCGGGAGGGAGU), were synthesized by Stanford Protein and Nucleic Acid Biotechnology Facility, Stanford University (Stanford, CA). Antifade reagent was purchased from Molecular Probes Inc. (Eugene, OR). Restriction enzyme sites were introduced by a 5′-end primer 5′-GAGCTCGGATCCACTAGTCCAGTGTG GTGG-3′ and a 3′-end primer 5′-GTCACCGCCGGCGAGCTCAGATCTCCCGGG-3′ flanking the insertion site. All constructs were confirmed by restriction enzyme mapping, and the mutations were verified by DNA sequencing. All constructs were confirmed by restriction enzyme mapping, and the mutations were verified by DNA sequencing. An ARE deletion clone was generated within the pENTR/3′UTR using QuickChange Mutangenesis Kit (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA). Cell Culture and TransfectionThe HT1080 human fibrosarcoma cells were grown as previously described (Dean et al , 1988) and plated at a density of 105 cells/100 mm dish 24 h prior to transfection. Ten μg of empty vector (pCR3), wild type pCR3-LC3 (LC3-WT) plasmid or mutant pCR3-LC3/R68-70Q (LC3-R/Q), plasmid, were used to transfect each dish for 3 h using SuperFect or FuGENE transfection reagent, according to manufacturer’s instructions. The media were changed every two days with gradually increasing concentrations of G418 up to 800 μg/ml. To determine the role of the ARE in the FN 3′UTR, transient transfections were carried out using the wild type and mutant rat FN constructs described above. Protein extracts (20 μg) in Laemmli sample buffer (5% β-mercaptoethanol, 2% SDS, 10% glycerol, 62.5 mM TRIS-HCl pH 6.8) were separated on a 4–12% Bis-Tris gel (Novex) and transferred to a nylon membrane (Invitrogen). Briefly, cells were incubated with 0.1 mg/ml cycloheximide for 3 min at 37°C before being harvested. All analyses were performed three times and representative experiments are shown. All analyses were performed three times and representative experiments are shown. All analyses were performed three times and representative experiments are shown. As a control, an EDTA release experiment was also performed in which MgCl2 was substituted with 15 mM EDTA in the extraction buffer and the gradient. Quantitative RT-PCR reactions were carried out in 384-well plates in a 20 μl volume containing 4 μl of cDNA, 5 μl of water, 1 μl of TaqMAN probe and 10 μl super master mix buffer (ABI, Foster City, CA). Values were assessed un-normalized or normalized to 18S RNA with similar results. To establish that LC3-ARE binding can mediate enhanced FN mRNA translation in these cells, we constructed vectors encoding the wild-type LC3 (LC3-WT), and a mutant form of LC3, in which triple arginine motif of the ARM was replaced with glutamine, thus abolishing the positive charge of the ARM (LC3-R/Q). The probes used for qRT-PCR were: FN1 (Hs00415006_m1), CTGF (Hs00170014_m1), THBS1 (Hs00170236_m1), CDH11 (Hs00156438_m1), COL6A3 (Hs00189128_m1), COL12A1 (Hs00189184_m1), DSC1 (Hs00245189), INHBA (Hs00170103_m1), EGFR (Hs00193306_m1) and TRIB1 (Hs00179769_m1). A total of 60 μg of cytoplasmic extracts were incubated for 30 minutes in a binding reaction containing γ-32P–labeled single-stranded oligonucleotides with the FN ARE sequence (ACCUGUUAUUUAUCAAUU), 100 mM KCl, 20 mM HEPES, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM DTT, 20% glycerol, 500 ng of salmon sperm and 0.01 units of Poly (dI-dC). Each experiment was repeated at least three times. Adhesion AssayAdhesion assays were performed as described by Keisuke et al, with minor modifications (Ishida Keisuke et al 2004). Cells in five random fields in each well were counted, and the mean value was calculated. The membrane has a thin layer of GFR Matrigel matrix that serves as a reconstituted basement membrane in vitro. The membrane has a thin layer of GFR Matrigel matrix that serves as a reconstituted basement membrane in vitro. Equal numbers of BD BioCoat Control Inserts (without the GFR Matrigel coating) were included as controls. Equal numbers of BD BioCoat Control Inserts (without the GFR Matrigel coating) were included as controls. Control and empty spots on the arrays were not included for the analysis, as well as those spots flagged as bad spots due to technical errors. Immunofluorescence was detected using goat anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor® 488 nm and goat anti-mouse Alexa Fluor® 594 nm secondary antibodies (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR, USA) and slides were mounted using SlowFade® anti-fade with DAPI (Molecular Probes). CD 31 (anti-PECAM) primary antibody was added (1:50) for one hour followed by incubations with goat anti rat-biotinylated (1:100) and Streptavidin-HRP (1:500) antibodies for 30 min each. CD 31 (anti-PECAM) primary antibody was added (1:50) for one hour followed by incubations with goat anti rat-biotinylated (1:100) and Streptavidin-HRP (1:500) antibodies for 30 min each. Statistical AnalysesFor comparisons between groups, data were subjected to ANOVA followed by Bonferroni’s test of multiple comparisons to determine which groups were different. Similar results were obtained with assessment of newly synthesized FN secreted into the cultured media and measured following [35S]-methionine metabolic labeling as described in “Materials and Methods”. Similar results were obtained with assessment of newly synthesized FN secreted into the cultured media and measured following [35S]-methionine metabolic labeling as described in “Materials and Methods”. Cytoplasmic extracts from LC3-WT, LC-R/Q and vector transfected HT1080 cells were incubated with radiolabeled wild-type FN ARE (wtARE) RNA oligonucleotides and competition assessed using extracts from LC3 transfected cells and both excess cold wt ARE or an irrelevant oligonucleotide. The binding (indicated by the arrow) is specific, as it was competed completely by excess of unlabeled FN ARE (LC3-WT+cold probe) and much less well by an oligonucleotide without the consensus ARE (LC3-WT+irrelevant probe). LC3 Regulates Cell GrowthIncreased production of FN in tumor cells has been previously reported to revert the transformed phenotype by enhancing adhesion of cells to the substrate, changing their morphology from rounded to spread and decreasing their growth rate (Dean et al , 1988). Similar results were observed using multiple clones (data not shown). 3B).To determine whether the increase in growth in LC3-WT transfected HT1080 cells was dependent on the increase in FN, RNA interference (i) was used to repress FN mRNA in both LC3-WT and vector-transfected cells. 3B).To determine whether the increase in growth in LC3-WT transfected HT1080 cells was dependent on the increase in FN, RNA interference (i) was used to repress FN mRNA in both LC3-WT and vector-transfected cells. 3B).To determine whether the increase in growth in LC3-WT transfected HT1080 cells was dependent on the increase in FN, RNA interference (i) was used to repress FN mRNA in both LC3-WT and vector-transfected cells. 3B).To determine whether the increase in growth in LC3-WT transfected HT1080 cells was dependent on the increase in FN, RNA interference (i) was used to repress FN mRNA in both LC3-WT and vector-transfected cells. 4C, 4D) and also without serum (data not shown). Confirmed up-regulated genes are listed in Table 1. Confirmed up-regulated genes are listed in Table 1. We reduced levels of CTGF protein and mRNA more than 80% by siRNA, as assessed by western immunoblot (Fig. We reduced levels of CTGF protein and mRNA more than 80% by siRNA, as assessed by western immunoblot (Fig. The decreased adhesion of LC3 vector and LC3-WT transfected cells that was evident following treatment with CTGF siRNA, was not significantly rescued by plating the cells on FN. The decreased adhesion of LC3 vector and LC3-WT transfected cells that was evident following treatment with CTGF siRNA, was not significantly rescued by plating the cells on FN. The decreased adhesion of LC3 vector and LC3-WT transfected cells that was evident following treatment with CTGF siRNA, was not significantly rescued by plating the cells on FN. The decreased adhesion of LC3 vector and LC3-WT transfected cells that was evident following treatment with CTGF siRNA, was not significantly rescued by plating the cells on FN. 