Because it is well documented that nonsurface bound silanes are readily eliminated by thorough washing, it can be safely assumed that the primary amines detected by FQ belong exclusively to surface bound coupling agents.47–50 ATTO-TAG FQ reacts with the primary amines of these coupling agents to form a highly fluorescent product detectable to the attomole range.42 Post-silylation primary amine levels were found to be 1.10 ± 0.17, 0.15 ± 0.01, and 0.11 ± 0.03 μmol/mg for APTES, AHAMTES, and APDMES treated DE, respectively (Table 1).Interestingly, APTES-DE showed amine levels approximately 7 times higher than AHAMTES-DE and 10 times higher than APDMES-DE derived under the same conditions. Because it is well documented that nonsurface bound silanes are readily eliminated by thorough washing, it can be safely assumed that the primary amines detected by FQ belong exclusively to surface bound coupling agents.47–50 ATTO-TAG FQ reacts with the primary amines of these coupling agents to form a highly fluorescent product detectable to the attomole range.42 Post-silylation primary amine levels were found to be 1.10 ± 0.17, 0.15 ± 0.01, and 0.11 ± 0.03 μmol/mg for APTES, AHAMTES, and APDMES treated DE, respectively (Table 1).Interestingly, APTES-DE showed amine levels approximately 7 times higher than AHAMTES-DE and 10 times higher than APDMES-DE derived under the same conditions. Because it is well documented that nonsurface bound silanes are readily eliminated by thorough washing, it can be safely assumed that the primary amines detected by FQ belong exclusively to surface bound coupling agents.47–50 ATTO-TAG FQ reacts with the primary amines of these coupling agents to form a highly fluorescent product detectable to the attomole range.42 Post-silylation primary amine levels were found to be 1.10 ± 0.17, 0.15 ± 0.01, and 0.11 ± 0.03 μmol/mg for APTES, AHAMTES, and APDMES treated DE, respectively (Table 1).Interestingly, APTES-DE showed amine levels approximately 7 times higher than AHAMTES-DE and 10 times higher than APDMES-DE derived under the same conditions. It is widely theorized that aminosilane attachment proceeds via the primary amine catalyzed SN2 exchange reaction between the ethoxy groups of silanes and the oxygens of silanols.47–49 Because of this, APTES and AHAMTES, which possess three ethoxy groups each, are inherently more reactive than APDMES containing only a single ethoxy group. Three ethoxy moieties allow APTES and AHAMTES to self-polymerize with surface bound and free aminosilanes to form three-dimensional amine rich surface multilayers (Figure 3).While this explains the tendency for APDMES to form only low amine content monolayers, it fails to explain why APTES and AHAMTES, despite their equivalent number of ethoxy groups, result in considerably different amine concentrations. Because aminosilylation relies upon intramolecular primary amine catalysis, it is essential that the terminal amines of APTES and AHAMTES be available to the sites of SN2 exchange.48,49 While APTES is believed to form a five-membered cyclic intermediate which places its primary amine adjacent to the site of SN2 exchange, AHAMTES possesses a significantly longer alkyl chain which reduces its ability to undergo a similar intramolecular catalysis (Figure 2).48,49 This conformational difference reduces the ability of AHAMTES to form high amine content surface coatings.49 The sulfhydryl concentrations of APTES, AHAMTES, and APDMES were found to be 0.0312 ± 0.006 (n = 9), 0.0181 ± 0.003 (n = 3), and 0.0130 ± 0.001 μmol/mg (n = 3), respectively (Table 1).While these results support the expectation that higher levels of surface bound amines result in increased NAP attachment, a direct proportionality between amine content and subsequent NAP attachment was not observed. A closer examination of these results reveals that the percentages of surface amines tethered to NAP-thiolactone were 2.84, 12.1, and 11.8% for APTES, AHAMTES, and APDMES, respectively.Because the thickness of aminosilane layers is the most meaningful difference between cross-linkers employed in this work, lower amine conversion ratios for APTES multilayers suggest that the deposition of aminosilane coupling agents past monolayer thicknesses improves NAP attachment only marginally. A closer examination of these results reveals that the percentages of surface amines tethered to NAP-thiolactone were 2.84, 12.1, and 11.8% for APTES, AHAMTES, and APDMES, respectively.Because the thickness of aminosilane layers is the most meaningful difference between cross-linkers employed in this work, lower amine conversion ratios for APTES multilayers suggest that the deposition of aminosilane coupling agents past monolayer thicknesses improves NAP attachment only marginally. A closer examination of these results reveals that the percentages of surface amines tethered to NAP-thiolactone were 2.84, 12.1, and 11.8% for APTES, AHAMTES, and APDMES, respectively.Because the thickness of aminosilane layers is the most meaningful difference between cross-linkers employed in this work, lower amine conversion ratios for APTES multilayers suggest that the deposition of aminosilane coupling agents past monolayer thicknesses improves NAP attachment only marginally. Similarly, low amine conversions were observed by Frost et al  when tethering NO-releasing groups to amine-modified fumed silica particles.26 An alternative explanation for the presence of high APTES levels with comparatively low thiol levels is that APTES, possessing a shorter, more reactive alkyl chain, may self-react to produce a bulk product distinct from diatomaceous earth particles. Furthermore, because targeted NO release levels vary greatly across applications, the ability to fine-tune NO flux by modulating the mass of SNAP-DE incorporated into materials is a tremendous asset.Physiological conditions were chosen for NO release testing to mimic the in vivo conditions of biomedical applications and for facile comparison with previously reported NO-releasing particles. Diatomaceous earth modified with APTES/NAP yielded the highest levels of silane and NAP attachment and was nitrosated for further evaluation. This work marks the first time an NO donor has been covalently linked to diatomaceous earth to form a next-generation NO-delivery scaffold of natural origin. This work marks the first time an NO donor has been covalently linked to diatomaceous earth to form a next-generation NO-delivery scaffold of natural origin. Lastly, the antibacterial and noncytotoxic properties of the biotemplated NO-releasing diatomaceous earth silica scaffolds were evaluated. Lastly, the antibacterial and noncytotoxic properties of the biotemplated NO-releasing diatomaceous earth silica scaffolds were evaluated. The current study was performed per ISO standards for cytotoxicity using a WST-8 dye based CCK-8 kit (Sigma-Aldrich). The current study was performed per ISO standards for cytotoxicity using a WST-8 dye based CCK-8 kit (Sigma-Aldrich). The current study was performed per ISO standards for cytotoxicity using a WST-8 dye based CCK-8 kit (Sigma-Aldrich). Mouse fibroblast cells were exposed to 10 μL of SNAP-DE material (1 mg/mL). Mouse fibroblast cells were exposed to 10 μL of SNAP-DE material (1 mg/mL). Sulfhydryl levels of APTES-NAP and nitric oxide levels of APTES-SNAP were found to be 0.0312 ± 0.006 and 0.0372 ± 0.00791 μmol/mg, respectively. 2.1.Materials.Fossil Shell Flour Diatomaceous Earth was purchased from Perma-Guard, Inc. (Bountiful, UT). 200 proof ethanol was obtained from Decon Laboratories, Inc. (King of Prussia, PA). The organic layer containing NAP thiolactone was then dried using anhydrous magnesium sulfate subsequently eliminated by filtration. The water in the purified suspension was removed by centrifugation at 3500 rpm for 3 min and dried under vacuum.2.3.2.Surface Silylation.Silylated diatomaceous earth (aminosilane-DE) was prepared by refluxing purified DE with one of three aminosilanes (APTES, AHAMTES, and APDMES) in toluene for 24 h in accordance with a previously reported protocol (1 g of DE:21.4 mmol of aminosilane:100 mL of toluene).26 Primary amine-containing silanes (Figure 2) were selected as cross-linkers because of their ability to promote the NAP-thiolactone ring-opening required to tether NAP to aminosilane DE via an amide bond.41 After each reflux, the amine-functionalized DE products were washed four times with toluene and twice with ethanol before being dried in an oven at 80 °C overnight.2.3.3.NAP Attachment.NAP-DE was prepared by stirring aminosilane-DE with NAP-thiolactone for 24 h in toluene (100 mg of silylated DE:80 mg of NAP-thiolactone:5 mL of toluene). S-Nitrosothiols (RSNOs) in particular have emerged as one of the most popular classes of nitric oxide donors.1,9,10 Synthesized via an acidified nitrosation reaction between thiols (RSH) and nitrite, nitrogen oxides, or alkyl nitrites, RSNOs undergo chemical, photolytic, and thermal decomposition to release NO.9,13S-nitroso-N-acetyl-penicillamine (SNAP), the nitrosated form of N-acetylpenicillamine (NAP), an amino acid derivative that has been used to treat cystinuria at doses of 2–4 g/day for 155 days with minimal side effects, is one of the most prevalent RSNO molecules due to its relatively high molecular stability and nontoxic origins.1,9,10,14 2.4.FQ Primary Amine Quantification.The ATTO-TAG FQ test for primary amines was conducted in accordance with a previously reported protocol.42 Stock solutions of 10 mM FQ and 10 mM KCN in methanol and water, respectively, were prepared. A working ATTO-TAG FQ solution was created which consisted of 10 μL of FQ stock solution, 20 μL of KCN stock solution, 190 μL of water, and 5 μL of sample. 2.5.Ellman’s Test for Free Sulfhydryls.Ellman’s Reagent, 5,5′-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic acid), was used to quantify the free sulfhydryl content of NAP-DE according to a previous protocol.43 Briefly, a DTNB stock solution (2 mM DTNB, 50 mM NaAc) was used to create a working DTNB solution consisting of 50 μL of DTNB stock solution, 100 μL of PBS, 840 μL of H2O, and 10 μL of sample. 2.5.Ellman’s Test for Free Sulfhydryls.Ellman’s Reagent, 5,5′-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic acid), was used to quantify the free sulfhydryl content of NAP-DE according to a previous protocol.43 Briefly, a DTNB stock solution (2 mM DTNB, 50 mM NaAc) was used to create a working DTNB solution consisting of 50 μL of DTNB stock solution, 100 μL of PBS, 840 μL of H2O, and 10 μL of sample. 2.5.Ellman’s Test for Free Sulfhydryls.Ellman’s Reagent, 5,5′-dithiobis(2-nitrobenzoic acid), was used to quantify the free sulfhydryl content of NAP-DE according to a previous protocol.43 Briefly, a DTNB stock solution (2 mM DTNB, 50 mM NaAc) was used to create a working DTNB solution consisting of 50 μL of DTNB stock solution, 100 μL of PBS, 840 μL of H2O, and 10 μL of sample. To measure total NO loading, alternating injections of 0.25 M copper(II) chloride and ascorbic acid were added to the NOA reaction vessel. Between the final and initial NOA measurements, physiological conditions were maintained by storing the samples in 0.01 M PBS with EDTA at 37 °C. The bacteria were then separated from the original media and suspended in PBS buffer. This provided the bacteria with an osmotic physiological environment and prevented bacterial proliferation. The SNAP-DE and unmodified DE were suspended in triplicates (n = 3) in 1 mL of PBS-bacteria culture. Before suspension, SNAP-DE was weighed such that 0.8 μmol of NO was released per milliliter of PBS/cell solution. This weight was determined by calculating the total NO released per milligram of SNAP-DE over a 24 h period under conditions mimicking those of the bacterial suspension. 2.10.Formazan-Based Cell Cytotoxicity Test.The cell cytotoxicity kit (CCK-8) (Sigma-Aldrich) provides a standard WST-8 [2-(2-methoxy-4-nitrophenyl)-3-(4-nitrophenyl)-5-(2,4-disulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium monosodium salt] based cell viability assay. Specifically, diazeniumdiolate-based silica scaffolds undergo burst release, eliminating all stored nitric oxide within hours and limiting their utility.27–30 Additionally, virtually all previously reported NO releasing scaffolds have been nonporous and on the nanoscale.26–31 Mesoporous, micrometer scale silica RSNO scaffolds have not yet been created and demonstrate novel physical properties and NO release kinetics. The culture medium was replaced intermittently and cells were checked daily for growth and contamination. After the confluence reached above 80%, cells were detached from the T-flask (trypsinized with 0.18% trypsin and 5 mM EDTA). Around 5000 cells/mL were seeded in a cell culture grade 96 well plate and incubated for 24 h in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2.Cytotoxicity Test.The manufacture’s protocol (Sigma-Aldrich) was followed to perform the cytocompatibility test using a CCK-8 kit on the mouse fibroblast cells. After 24 h of cell culture incubation in a 96-well plate, 10 μL of the leachates from control DE and SNAP-DE was added (n = 7) to the cells. 