In addition to Reg3 lectins and defensins, cathelicidins are one of the major AMP families. To further confirm our observations in BMDMs, we extended these ex vivo experiments to in vitro using RAW264.7 macrophages. LL-37 is the sole member of the human cathelicidin family, and has a murine ortholog, cathelicidin-related antimicrobial peptide (CRAMP). LL-37/CRAMP has piqued great research interest for its dual role in modulating microbiota and immune response in several infectious diseases and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) [13–15]. Desferrioxamine (DFO), a HIF-1α activator, significantly increased CRAMP expression in control siRNA-transfected cells, but not in the Camp-siRNA-transfected cells (Figure 4D). Desferrioxamine (DFO), a HIF-1α activator, significantly increased CRAMP expression in control siRNA-transfected cells, but not in the Camp-siRNA-transfected cells (Figure 4D). Hepatic inflammation is a hallmark of ALD development. Alcohol exposure reduces antimicrobial peptide expression and causes intestinal bacterial dysbiosis, immune dysregulation, and gut barrier dysfunction, which, in turn, leads to increased endotoxin release and hepatic bacterial translocation that activate TLR-4 on Kupffer cells and causes liver inflammation. Alcohol exposure induces gut dysbiosis, which is largely attributed to the reduced expression of antimicrobial factors. Reg3 lectins represent an important family of gut-derived AMPs, and depleting Reg3b and Reg3g exacerbated, while increasing Reg3g expression attenuated, gut dysbiosis and alcohol-induced liver injury [9]. A recent study further showed that alcohol feeding caused α-defensin dysfunction, which was critically involved in the pathogenesis of alcoholic hepatitis in mice [12]. A recent study further showed that alcohol feeding caused α-defensin dysfunction, which was critically involved in the pathogenesis of alcoholic hepatitis in mice [12]. Our recent study demonstrated that intestinal HIF-1α plays an important role in maintaining gut microbiota homeostasis and gut barrier function by activating barrier-protecting factors, such as CRAMP, β-defensins, cluster of differentiation 73 (CD73), and claudin-1. Indeed, alcohol exposure induced a significant decrease of Bacteroidetes and an increase of Firmicutes in Camp−/− mice compared with WT mice, as has been demonstrated in previous studies [33,37]. Indeed, alcohol exposure induced a significant decrease of Bacteroidetes and an increase of Firmicutes in Camp−/− mice compared with WT mice, as has been demonstrated in previous studies [33,37]. Indeed, alcohol exposure induced a significant decrease of Bacteroidetes and an increase of Firmicutes in Camp−/− mice compared with WT mice, as has been demonstrated in previous studies [33,37]. Indeed, alcohol exposure induced a significant decrease of Bacteroidetes and an increase of Firmicutes in Camp−/− mice compared with WT mice, as has been demonstrated in previous studies [33,37]. Indeed, alcohol exposure induced a significant decrease of Bacteroidetes and an increase of Firmicutes in Camp−/− mice compared with WT mice, as has been demonstrated in previous studies [33,37]. At the genus level, we found that Akkermansia was decreased in Camp−/− mice. Unlike Reg3, which is expressed mainly in the intestine, CRAMP is expressed in multiple organs, including the intestine, lung, liver, spleen, and adipose tissue. Alcohol treatment increased hepatic but decreased intestinal CRAMP expression in mice. The NLRP3 inflammasome [an intracellular protein complex consisting of NLRP3, apoptosis-associated speck protein with caspase activation and recruitment domain (ASC), and caspase-1] is one of the most studied inflammasomes. The NLRP3 inflammasome [an intracellular protein complex consisting of NLRP3, apoptosis-associated speck protein with caspase activation and recruitment domain (ASC), and caspase-1] is one of the most studied inflammasomes. The NLRP3 inflammasome [an intracellular protein complex consisting of NLRP3, apoptosis-associated speck protein with caspase activation and recruitment domain (ASC), and caspase-1] is one of the most studied inflammasomes. Agreeing with these studies, we showed that serum IL-1β levels are positively correlated with levels of UA in patients with ALD, and UA combined with LPS induced a robust elevation of mature IL-1β levels, further demonstrating the requirement of two signals in IL-1β production. Agreeing with these studies, we showed that serum IL-1β levels are positively correlated with levels of UA in patients with ALD, and UA combined with LPS induced a robust elevation of mature IL-1β levels, further demonstrating the requirement of two signals in IL-1β production. UA metabolism is regulated by multiple mechanisms. Fecal microbiota changes in CRAMP KO mice in response to alcohol feedingFigure S3. AnimalsAll mice were treated according to the protocols reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of Louisville. AnimalsAll mice were treated according to the protocols reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of Louisville. AnimalsAll mice were treated according to the protocols reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of Louisville. AnimalsAll mice were treated according to the protocols reviewed and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the University of Louisville. Camp−/− male mice (B6.129X1, JAX stock #017799; Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, USA) at the age of 8–10 weeks were used with their age-matched WT (C57BL/6J) mice. Camp−/− male mice (B6.129X1, JAX stock #017799; Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, USA) at the age of 8–10 weeks were used with their age-matched WT (C57BL/6J) mice. Camp−/− male mice (B6.129X1, JAX stock #017799; Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, USA) at the age of 8–10 weeks were used with their age-matched WT (C57BL/6J) mice. Camp−/− male mice (B6.129X1, JAX stock #017799; Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, USA) at the age of 8–10 weeks were used with their age-matched WT (C57BL/6J) mice. Camp−/− male mice (B6.129X1, JAX stock #017799; Jackson Laboratory, Bar Harbor, ME, USA) at the age of 8–10 weeks were used with their age-matched WT (C57BL/6J) mice. Mice were maintained at 22 °C with a 12 h light/dark cycle and had free access to a normal chow diet and tap water. Alcohol consumption causes dysbiosis and ‘leaky gut’, which allows the translocation of bacteria and its products through the portal vein to the liver, resulting in damage to the liver cells and the development of hepatic steatosis and liver injury through the toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4)-mediated pathway [4,5]. Serum/plasma samples were from an Alcohol Use Disorder study at NIAAA and from an Acute Alcoholic Hepatitis study at the University of Louisville. Serum/plasma samples were from an Alcohol Use Disorder study at NIAAA and from an Acute Alcoholic Hepatitis study at the University of Louisville. StatisticsStatistical analyses were performed using the statistical computer package GraphPad Prism version 6 (GraphPad Software Inc, San Diego, CA, USA), MS Excel 2016 (Microsoft Corp, Redmond, WA, USA) or SPSS 26.0 (IBM, Chicago, IL, USA). Statistical comparisons were made using two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Tukey’s post hoc test or Student’s t-test, where appropriate. Results One of the most important mechanisms maintaining gut microbiota homeostasis is antimicrobial peptide (AMP)-mediated regulation. Alcohol feeding significantly increased Camp mRNA expression in the liver and spleen, and decreased it in the lung tissue, while no change was found in the epididymal white adipose tissue (eWAT) (Figure 1A). Alcohol feeding significantly increased Camp mRNA expression in the liver and spleen, and decreased it in the lung tissue, while no change was found in the epididymal white adipose tissue (eWAT) (Figure 1A). Alcohol feeding increased hepatic fat accumulation in both WT and Camp−/− mice, but much more severe macrosteatosis was found in Camp−/− mice (Figure 2B), which was then confirmed by Oil Red O staining of frozen liver sections (Figure 2B). Moreover, alcohol exposure induced more hepatic apoptosis in Camp−/− mice, shown as an increased number of terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase biotin-dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL)-positive cells (Figure 2B). Moreover, alcohol exposure induced more hepatic apoptosis in Camp−/− mice, shown as an increased number of terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase biotin-dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL)-positive cells (Figure 2B). These results suggest that alcohol feeding exacerbates liver steatosis, injury, and hepatic cell death when CRAMP is deficient. Inflammation is a hallmark of ALD in animal models and human subjects [30,31]. Previous studies have demonstrated the critical role of AMPs in the pathogenesis of ALD [9–11]. Total bacterial loads in fecal samples of WT and Camp−/− mice were comparable (supplementary material, Figure S2C). Total bacterial loads in fecal samples of WT and Camp−/− mice were comparable (supplementary material, Figure S2C). Total bacterial loads in fecal samples of WT and Camp−/− mice were comparable (supplementary material, Figure S2C). However, alcohol-induced LPS increases were comparable between WT and Camp−/− mice (Figure 3B, left panel). However, alcohol-induced LPS increases were comparable between WT and Camp−/− mice (Figure 3B, left panel). 