In addition, we also tested if the rapid MK-801 block of NMDA-mEPSCs we observed above (Fig. In addition, we also tested if the rapid MK-801 block of NMDA-mEPSCs we observed above (Fig. In addition, we also tested if the rapid MK-801 block of NMDA-mEPSCs we observed above (Fig. In addition, we also tested if the rapid MK-801 block of NMDA-mEPSCs we observed above (Fig. 1) may in part be due to block of presynaptic NMDA receptors. In contrast, the amplitudes of NMDA-eEPSCs recorded before and after the incubation period were not affected by the MK-801 treatment in between (before MK-801: 1072 ± 157 pA, after MK-801: 879 ± 114 pA, p>0.2, n=5) suggesting that application of MK-801 at rest did not block the NMDA receptors activated during stimulation (Fig. Under this condition we still observed a modest reduction in NMDA-eEPSC amplitude after 10-minute incubation with MK-801 (before MK-801: 489 ± 67 pA, after MK-801: 411 ± 29 pA, p>0.05, n=4). Under this condition we still observed a modest reduction in NMDA-eEPSC amplitude after 10-minute incubation with MK-801 (before MK-801: 489 ± 67 pA, after MK-801: 411 ± 29 pA, p>0.05, n=4). Under this condition we still observed a modest reduction in NMDA-eEPSC amplitude after 10-minute incubation with MK-801 (before MK-801: 489 ± 67 pA, after MK-801: 411 ± 29 pA, p>0.05, n=4). Here, it is important to note that a 10-minute-long whole cell recording results in some run down of the NMDA-eEPSC independent of MK-801 treatment. These results suggest that the NMDA receptors activated by spontaneous release events may mix with other NMDA receptors over long periods consistent with the slow mobility and mixing of NMDA receptors on a dendrite. First, we replicated the original observations in hippocampal slices (Hessler et al , 1993). We then rapidly removed MK-801 and measured the NMDA-eEPSC after 1 minute (Fig. We then rapidly removed MK-801 and measured the NMDA-eEPSC after 1 minute (Fig. In the next set of experiments, we tested whether NMDA-mEPSCs recover from MK-801 block and if this recovery is coupled to recovery of NMDA-eEPSCs. In the next set of experiments, we tested whether NMDA-mEPSCs recover from MK-801 block and if this recovery is coupled to recovery of NMDA-eEPSCs. eEPSCs and mEPSCs were recorded prior to a 20 min incubation in 5 μM MK-801 and 500 nM TTX (Fig. eEPSCs and mEPSCs were recorded prior to a 20 min incubation in 5 μM MK-801 and 500 nM TTX (Fig. eEPSCs and mEPSCs were recorded prior to a 20 min incubation in 5 μM MK-801 and 500 nM TTX (Fig. eEPSCs and mEPSCs were recorded prior to a 20 min incubation in 5 μM MK-801 and 500 nM TTX (Fig. Slice preparationTransverse hippocampal slices (400 μM) were prepared from 12- to 21- day old Sprague–Dawley rats and incubated in oxygenated solution containing in mM: 124 NaCl, 5 KCl, 12 NaH2PO4, 26 NaHCO3, 10 D-Glucose, 2 CaCl2 and 1 MgCl2 at room temperature (24-27°C). Spontaneous synaptic vesicle fusion is a salient feature of all synapses (Fatt and Katz, 1952; Del Castillo and Katz, 1954) including those in synaptic networks in vivo (Pare et al , 1997; Pare et al , 1998; Chadderton et al , 2004). In the next set of experiments, we addressed this question by using an optical imaging approach to compare the propensity of evoked and spontaneous release at individual synapses. In the next set of experiments, we addressed this question by using an optical imaging approach to compare the propensity of evoked and spontaneous release at individual synapses. This construct is better localized to synaptic vesicles and manifests minimal surface fluorescence compared to the classical synaptophluorin, which is a fusion construct of synaptobrevin (Zhu et al , Society for Neuroscience Abstract 2004; (Granseth et al , 2006)) (Fig. For these imaging experiments we selected isolated 1 μm2 fluorescent puncta, which typically correspond to individual synapses (Liu et al , 1999). Folimycin traps vesicles in an alkaline state after endocytosis and provides a cumulative measure of exocytosis (Ryan et al , 1997; Sankaranarayanan and Ryan, 2001). During experiments, slices were submerged and extracellular solution was continuously exchanged with a flow rate of 1-3ml/min. 1G-H) (Sara et al , 2005). All experiments were performed at room temperature. 14.7% (65 synapses) of synapses exhibited either no evoked release or they showed evoked release at a rate less than spontaneous release (Kimura et al , 1997). ElectrophysiologyIn dissociated cultures, cells with pyramidal morphology were whole cell voltage-clamped to -70 mV in a modified Tyrode’s solution containing (in mM): 150 NaCl, 4 KCl, 2 MgCl2, 10 glucose, 10 HEPES, and 2 CaCl2 (pH 7.4, 310 mOsm). 6% (27 synapses) did not show any detectable spontaneous release but manifested evoked release. 6% (27 synapses) did not show any detectable spontaneous release but manifested evoked release. 6% (27 synapses) did not show any detectable spontaneous release but manifested evoked release. This estimate is in line with earlier work (Geppert et al , 1994; Murthy and Stevens, 1999; Sara et al , 2005) as well as our electrophysiological measurements in this study (Fig. In addition, spontaneous release events do not appear to be ectopic as they occur at discrete spots coincident with intense evoked release rather than being diffusely distributed along an axon. Furthermore, remaining NMDA-eEPSCs showed minimal recovery from MK-801 block during 5 pulses applied at 0.1 Hz (data not shown). For instance, NMDA receptors composed of NR1/NR2B subunits display higher affinity fro the coagonist glycine and slower deactivation (Priestley et al , 1995; Thomas et al , 2006). Quantitative assessment of geometric constraints on independent NMDA receptor signaling at individual postsynaptic densitiesThe results presented so far argue for the co-existence of evoked and spontaneous release within a 1 μm2 synaptophysin-pHluorin labeled spot that presumably correspond to individual presynaptic terminals. Within the synaptic cleft we assumed a diffusion coefficient of 0.4 μm2/ms in accordance with several earlier estimates (Rusakov and Kullmann, 1998; Xu-Friedman and Regehr, 2003; Nielsen et al , 2004), whereas outside the cleft we assumed a diffusion coefficient of 0.75 μm2/ms. This scheme can account for several key features of synaptic NMDA receptor mediated currents including their non-saturation behavior seen in response to repetitive stimulation as well as their predominant modes of activity (High open probability H-mode, medium open probability M-mode and low open probability L-mode) (Popescu et al , 2004). This scheme can account for several key features of synaptic NMDA receptor mediated currents including their non-saturation behavior seen in response to repetitive stimulation as well as their predominant modes of activity (High open probability H-mode, medium open probability M-mode and low open probability L-mode) (Popescu et al , 2004). This scheme can account for several key features of synaptic NMDA receptor mediated currents including their non-saturation behavior seen in response to repetitive stimulation as well as their predominant modes of activity (High open probability H-mode, medium open probability M-mode and low open probability L-mode) (Popescu et al , 2004). This scheme can account for several key features of synaptic NMDA receptor mediated currents including their non-saturation behavior seen in response to repetitive stimulation as well as their predominant modes of activity (High open probability H-mode, medium open probability M-mode and low open probability L-mode) (Popescu et al , 2004). However, if these receptors respond to evoked release and typically manifest a low probability mode (such as the L-mode) as suggested by our experiments presented in Figure 7, and spontaneous release occurs in the vicinity of R16 (near the periphery of the PSD), then the receptors at the opposite corner of the PSD show a more than ~20-fold reduction in peak open probability compared to R16. However, the difference between the open probabilities of R16 and R6 decrease to ~1.9-fold if we follow the above assumption (and our results presented in figure 7) that R16 is M-mode and R6 is L-mode. In a medium sized synapse, the two forms of release would need to be organized laterally (towards opposite corners of the synaptic cleft), whereas in a large synapse the independence of spontaneous and evoked neurotransmission can be achieved if the two forms of release are organized in a center-surround fashion. In a medium sized synapse, the two forms of release would need to be organized laterally (towards opposite corners of the synaptic cleft), whereas in a large synapse the independence of spontaneous and evoked neurotransmission can be achieved if the two forms of release are organized in a center-surround fashion. Therefore, Sr2+ is commonly used in experimental settings where quantal events associated with a specific stimulated input onto a neuron is examined (Oliet et al , 1996). Therefore, Sr2+ is commonly used in experimental settings where quantal events associated with a specific stimulated input onto a neuron is examined (Oliet et al , 1996). However, continued stimulation in the presence of Sr2+ and MK-801 for 3 minutes resulted in substantial inhibition of NMDA-eEPSCs (Fig. Taken together, these findings suggest that, as in the case of syt 1-/- synapses, Sr2+ triggered asynchronous release does not activate the same NMDA receptors as spontaneous release and NMDA receptors activated by asynchronous and synchronous release overlap. Taken together, these findings suggest that, as in the case of syt 1-/- synapses, Sr2+ triggered asynchronous release does not activate the same NMDA receptors as spontaneous release and NMDA receptors activated by asynchronous and synchronous release overlap. Second, once the NMDA receptors that are activated by both evoked and spontaneous release were blocked, NMDA-mEPSCs showed significant recovery at rest without concomitant recovery of NMDA-eEPSCs. First, spontaneous and evoked fusion events may originate from different synapses thus they may not activate the same set of receptors (Townsend et al , 2003). This possibility is hard to ascertain in our measurements due to two major caveats of our optical analysis. Nevertheless, our optical analysis is consistent with an earlier study in the frog neuromuscular junction, which found that the level of spontaneous release is relatively uniform across active zones and the location of spontaneous release corresponded well with the sites of evoked release, although the propensity of evoked release varied widely among active zones (Zefirov et al , 1995). Therefore, if most spontaneous and evoked release events originate from the same synapse then it can still be meaningful to record frequency of mEPSCs or mIPSCs to determine whether there is a loss or an increase in the number of synapses. Therefore, if most spontaneous and evoked release events originate from the same synapse then it can still be meaningful to record frequency of mEPSCs or mIPSCs to determine whether there is a loss or an increase in the number of synapses. Therefore, if most spontaneous and evoked release events originate from the same synapse then it can still be meaningful to record frequency of mEPSCs or mIPSCs to determine whether there is a loss or an increase in the number of synapses. Therefore, if most spontaneous and evoked release events originate from the same synapse then it can still be meaningful to record frequency of mEPSCs or mIPSCs to determine whether there is a loss or an increase in the number of synapses. Therefore, if most spontaneous and evoked release events originate from the same synapse then it can still be meaningful to record frequency of mEPSCs or mIPSCs to determine whether there is a loss or an increase in the number of synapses. Therefore, if most spontaneous and evoked release events originate from the same synapse then it can still be meaningful to record frequency of mEPSCs or mIPSCs to determine whether there is a loss or an increase in the number of synapses. However, it may be difficult to correlate this parameter with evoked release probability. However, it may be difficult to correlate this parameter with evoked release probability. The fact that the kinetics of spontaneous and evoked quantal events match under most circumstances (Diamond and Jahr, 1995; Isaacson and Walmsley, 1995; Van der Kloot, 1996; Wall and Usowicz, 1998; Sun et al , 2002) makes a diffuse form of ectopic release an unlikely option to account for our observations. Furthermore, the rapidity of MK-801 block of NMDA-mEPSCs is consistent with the premise that spontaneous fusion events occur in discrete sites thus repetitively activating a cluster of receptors rather than fusing at sites diffusely distributed along an axon. Furthermore, the rapidity of MK-801 block of NMDA-mEPSCs is consistent with the premise that spontaneous fusion events occur in discrete sites thus repetitively activating a cluster of receptors rather than fusing at sites diffusely distributed along an axon. Furthermore, the rapidity of MK-801 block of NMDA-mEPSCs is consistent with the premise that spontaneous fusion events occur in discrete sites thus repetitively activating a cluster of receptors rather than fusing at sites diffusely distributed along an axon. We think this last model brings together the “different synapses” and “ectopic release” models in one scheme that could account for our data as well as earlier observations (Townsend et al , 2003). Accordingly, previous work showed that single vesicle fusion events activate only a small number of NMDA receptors (~3) that typically comprise less than 40% of the total number of NMDA receptors per postsynaptic site (Nimchinsky et al , 2004). Therefore, we think there is sufficient latitude for non-overlapping activation of NMDA receptors within a single synapse by evoked and spontaneous release events. Therefore, we think there is sufficient latitude for non-overlapping activation of NMDA receptors within a single synapse by evoked and spontaneous release events. Therefore, we think there is sufficient latitude for non-overlapping activation of NMDA receptors within a single synapse by evoked and spontaneous release events. Probing the properties of asynchronous releaseThe findings discussed above gave us an opportunity to address a key question on the role of synaptotagmin 1 in controlling neurotransmitter release. Therefore, our results support the premise that asynchronous unitary events detected in Sr2+ provide a more accurate picture for the quantal properties of evoked release (Oliet et al , 1996). Therefore, our results support the premise that asynchronous unitary events detected in Sr2+ provide a more accurate picture for the quantal properties of evoked release (Oliet et al , 1996). Solutions were exchanged via a local multibarrel perfusion pipette with a common perfusion port placed within 0.5 mm of the cell under study. All statistical comparisons were performed with two-tailed unpaired t-test (except in cases where measurements were paired e.g. However, it is yet unclear if spontaneous neurotransmitter release serves a well-defined purpose (Otsu and Murphy, 2003; Zucker, 2005). However, it is yet unclear if spontaneous neurotransmitter release serves a well-defined purpose (Otsu and Murphy, 2003; Zucker, 2005). The geometry is described by a 3-dimensional matrix S = (Si,j,k), Si,j,k = 1 if the element is inside the domain of diffusion, Si,j,k = 0 if the element is outside of the domain i.e., in non-diffusible domain.The standard thermo-diffusion equation is applicable for the glutamate concentration Ci,j,k = C(xi,yj,zk,t):(1)∂C∂t=Dglut(Cxx+Cyy+Czz);where the diffusion constant Dglut takes the value 0.4 μm2/ms inside the cleft and 0.75 μm2/ms outside the cleft. The geometry is described by a 3-dimensional matrix S = (Si,j,k), Si,j,k = 1 if the element is inside the domain of diffusion, Si,j,k = 0 if the element is outside of the domain i.e., in non-diffusible domain.The standard thermo-diffusion equation is applicable for the glutamate concentration Ci,j,k = C(xi,yj,zk,t):(1)∂C∂t=Dglut(Cxx+Cyy+Czz);where the diffusion constant Dglut takes the value 0.4 μm2/ms inside the cleft and 0.75 μm2/ms outside the cleft. The geometry is described by a 3-dimensional matrix S = (Si,j,k), Si,j,k = 1 if the element is inside the domain of diffusion, Si,j,k = 0 if the element is outside of the domain i.e., in non-diffusible domain.The standard thermo-diffusion equation is applicable for the glutamate concentration Ci,j,k = C(xi,yj,zk,t):(1)∂C∂t=Dglut(Cxx+Cyy+Czz);where the diffusion constant Dglut takes the value 0.4 μm2/ms inside the cleft and 0.75 μm2/ms outside the cleft. The space step and time step are chosen to ensure that the Courant–Friedrichs–Lewy condition (CFL condition) (Courant et al  1927; LeVeque 2007) is satisfied and the explicit finite difference scheme will be numerically stable. For L-mode kinetics, the equations are similar except for the reaction rate constants were chosen according to the following kinetic scheme:(L­modeNMDAreceptor)CU⇔6034[C]CM⇔12017[C]C1⇔161127C2⇔2610580C3⇔21672508O1⇔6623449O2. 1G, H and ref (Sara et al , 2005)). 1G, H and ref (Sara et al , 2005)). Therefore, MK-801 application is expected to alter the kinetics of NMDA-mEPSCs as they occur (Jahr and Stevens, 1990; Lester et al , 1990; Hessler et al , 1993). This conclusion is also supported by several earlier studies that examined the properties of NMDA-mEPSCs in comparison to AMPA-mEPSCs (Umemiya et al , 1999; Groc et al , 2002; Dalby and Mody, 2003). 