We anticipated that the bicyclic core of 2 would prearrange it in a boat-like conformation and that the high s-character of the cyclopropyl C–H bonds should lower the barrier for C–H activation relative to a typical 2° Csp3–H site19. Notably, no products derived from C–H functionalization of the methyl groups of the fluoroamide directing group were observed in this reaction. This is in marked contrast to other reported applications of this directing group, where C–H functionalization at β-methyl sites is strongly favored21,22. Late stage functionalization approaches are particularly valuable in the context of drug development, since they enable the rapid synthesis of analogues to optimize pharmacokinetic properties. Notably, the Ag additive mediates this transformation, and aminal 5 was obtained in 41% yield in the absence of Pd (entry 4). Notably, aryl bromides could also be used as the arylating reagent, albeit with reduced efficiency. Notably, aryl bromides could also be used as the arylating reagent, albeit with reduced efficiency. Overall, a 52% overall yield is obtained for the three relevant steps converting 2 to 6 (81% for installation of the directing group, 80% for C–H arylation with 4-iodobiphenyl, and 80% for removal of the directing group; Fig. We next sought to expand this reaction from model substrate 3 to piperidine 10 (Fig. We next sought to expand this reaction from model substrate 3 to piperidine 10 (Fig. We next sought to expand this reaction from model substrate 3 to piperidine 10 (Fig. Under the conditions optimized for 3, the piperidine substrate 10 afforded only 12% yield of the C–H arylation product 11a. The utility of this transformation is showcased in the late stage C–H arylation of Pfizer's smoking cessation drug varenicline (Chantix®, 12, Fig. This latter point is particularly noteworthy because the synthesis of this stereoisomer would be challenging using other synthetic approaches29. The C–H arylation of 13 with 4-iodo-o-xylene was conducted on scales ranging from 77 mg to 2.5 g of substrate, with nearly identical yields of 14e (43% and 38% isolated yield, respectively). In a similar fashion, our method proved effective for the late-stage C–H functionalization of the natural product cytisine (15, a nicotine addiction treatment), converting 16 to 17 in 25% yield. We anticipate that a similar approach will ultimately prove broadly useful for the remote C–H functionalization of diverse cyclic and acyclic secondary amine scaffolds. 1C) via nitrogen-directed transannular C–H activation. We envisioned that coordination of the nitrogen of an alicyclic amine such as piperidine to palladium could enable selective transannular C–H activation17, 18 to generate a bicyclo[2.2.1]palladacycle (exemplified by 1 in Fig. 