Five-lead electrodes were placed according to standard ECG placement recommendations (Hoetink et al , 2002) and each waveform was verified or edited prior to analyses. The stress tasks consisted of a standard speech task, in which participants were told to imagine that they were in a department store shopping and the security guard falsely accused them of shoplifting a belt. RSA was calculated on a minute by minute basis and aggregated across minutes within each epoch to increase measurement reliability. This suggests that disengagement may be particularly associated with a blunted heart rate for women, though this finding was not significant when tested in a block with income, which we consider a more rigorous test. Finally, using the same approach, greater parental psychological control at age 13 predicted higher levels of coping via denial by age 23 (β = .30, p = .001); see Table 4. Finally, using the same approach, greater parental psychological control at age 13 predicted higher levels of coping via denial by age 23 (β = .30, p = .001); see Table 4. The link between psychological control and blunted heart rate response was no longer significant with the mediators in the model, suggesting full mediation. The link between psychological control and blunted heart rate response was no longer significant with the mediators in the model, suggesting full mediation. The link between psychological control and blunted heart rate response was no longer significant with the mediators in the model, suggesting full mediation. The link between psychological control and blunted heart rate response was no longer significant with the mediators in the model, suggesting full mediation. This long-term, multi-method study identified a previously unrecognized potential social-developmental pathway from a range of interpersonal behaviors beginning in adolescence to disruption of basic physiological and social processes in adulthood. Psychologically controlling parental behavior at age 13 was found to be directly predictive of a blunted heart rate response and indirectly predictive of blunted RSA reactivity to stress at age 29. Psychologically controlling parental behavior at age 13 was found to be directly predictive of a blunted heart rate response and indirectly predictive of blunted RSA reactivity to stress at age 29. Interestingly, there are established links between both blunted heart rate as well as blunted RSA reactivity with depression, which is often characterized by difficulties with motivation and effort as well as heightened negative affect (Bylsma et al , 2014; Schwerdtfeger & Rosenkaimer, 2011). Interestingly, there are established links between both blunted heart rate as well as blunted RSA reactivity with depression, which is often characterized by difficulties with motivation and effort as well as heightened negative affect (Bylsma et al , 2014; Schwerdtfeger & Rosenkaimer, 2011). We posit that adolescents who experience the insidious stressor of overcontrolling parenting could well have both difficulty physiologically rising to the challenge of a stressor, which involves both upregulating sympathetic and downregulating parasympathetic functions. The current findings are consistent with the idea of allostatic load: Individuals who experience chronic stressors are compromised in their ability to respond physiologically to maintain homeostasis. We posited two mechanisms by which this phenomenon may play out. We posited two mechanisms by which this phenomenon may play out. We posited two mechanisms by which this phenomenon may play out. These participants also went on to cope by denying the existence of problems. Individuals experiencing parental psychological control appear to have learned that attempting to actively cope with problems was futile, particularly as they learned that they should not think for themselves or try to effect change. Individuals who begin adolescence with serious intrusions on their autonomy are likely to be set upon a maladaptive path that is stressful and taxing. In addition, interventions such as assertiveness training in adolescence and young adulthood may be of particular relevance to cardiovascular functioning. There are some important limitations to note in the current study. However, the current research lends support to the idea that cardiovascular blunting may be the result of dysfunction in the parasympathetic nervous system (reflected in RSA reactivity; possibly reflected in heart rate reactivity) and potentially the sympathetic nervous system (possibly reflected in heart rate reactivity). However, the current research lends support to the idea that cardiovascular blunting may be the result of dysfunction in the parasympathetic nervous system (reflected in RSA reactivity; possibly reflected in heart rate reactivity) and potentially the sympathetic nervous system (possibly reflected in heart rate reactivity). However, the current research lends support to the idea that cardiovascular blunting may be the result of dysfunction in the parasympathetic nervous system (reflected in RSA reactivity; possibly reflected in heart rate reactivity) and potentially the sympathetic nervous system (possibly reflected in heart rate reactivity). However, the current research lends support to the idea that cardiovascular blunting may be the result of dysfunction in the parasympathetic nervous system (reflected in RSA reactivity; possibly reflected in heart rate reactivity) and potentially the sympathetic nervous system (possibly reflected in heart rate reactivity). However, the current research lends support to the idea that cardiovascular blunting may be the result of dysfunction in the parasympathetic nervous system (reflected in RSA reactivity; possibly reflected in heart rate reactivity) and potentially the sympathetic nervous system (possibly reflected in heart rate reactivity). Similarly, although our use of lagged data allows us to understand the development of problems over time, the data is not experimental and does not allow us to make causal arguments. While our sample was diverse and representative of the population from which it was drawn, we are also unable to make cross-cultural comparisons. They may develop low expectations of their own capacity to establish autonomy in social relationships, leading them to cope with potential conflict or stress by “shutting down.” This notion is consistent with research in childhood linking intrusive and insensitive maternal behavior to later social withdrawal (Booth-LaForce & Oxford, 2008) and is a pathway that also appears likely to alter physiological responding (Heleniak, McLaughlin, Ormel, & Riese, 2016). Withdrawn individuals are also likely to form relationships with similarly withdrawn partners, reinforcing these maladaptive interpersonal styles (Collins, Cooper, Albino, & Allard, 2002; McPherson, Smith-Lovin, & Cook, 2001; Stanley, Markman, & Whitton, 2002). Furthermore, researchers have posited that a blunted neurological response to reward, which often accompanies withdrawal and passivity, is closely linked to a blunted response to stress (Ginty, 2013). Furthermore, researchers have posited that a blunted neurological response to reward, which often accompanies withdrawal and passivity, is closely linked to a blunted response to stress (Ginty, 2013). Furthermore, researchers have posited that a blunted neurological response to reward, which often accompanies withdrawal and passivity, is closely linked to a blunted response to stress (Ginty, 2013). Furthermore, researchers have posited that a blunted neurological response to reward, which often accompanies withdrawal and passivity, is closely linked to a blunted response to stress (Ginty, 2013). Furthermore, researchers have posited that a blunted neurological response to reward, which often accompanies withdrawal and passivity, is closely linked to a blunted response to stress (Ginty, 2013). Furthermore, researchers have posited that a blunted neurological response to reward, which often accompanies withdrawal and passivity, is closely linked to a blunted response to stress (Ginty, 2013). In addition to threatening a fundamental developmental need for autonomy, psychological control has the potential to undermine the connection between the adolescent and his or her attachment figures during this important transition. In addition to threatening a fundamental developmental need for autonomy, psychological control has the potential to undermine the connection between the adolescent and his or her attachment figures during this important transition. Identifying the early precursors of blunted cardiovascular responses may be a critical step in mitigating serious health and early mortality outcomes. The sample was demographically diverse and representative of the population from which it was drawn (baseline median family income was in the $40,000 to $59,000 range; the sample was 58% European-American, 29% African-American, 1% Asian, 1% Hispanic, .5% American Indian, 8% mixed race, and 2% other races/ethnicities). Students were recruited via an initial mailing to all parents of students in the school, along with follow-up contact efforts at school lunches. Students were recruited via an initial mailing to all parents of students in the school, along with follow-up contact efforts at school lunches. Adolescents who indicated they were interested in the study were contacted by telephone. At age 13, close friends reported that they had known the participants for an average of 4.02 years (SD = 2.88). At age 13, close friends reported that they had known the participants for an average of 4.02 years (SD = 2.88). At age 13, close friends reported that they had known the participants for an average of 4.02 years (SD = 2.88). At age 15, close friends reported knowing the participants for an average of 5.07 years (SD = 3.41). At age 15, close friends reported knowing the participants for an average of 5.07 years (SD = 3.41). At age 15, close friends reported knowing the participants for an average of 5.07 years (SD = 3.41). At age 15, close friends reported knowing the participants for an average of 5.07 years (SD = 3.41). Twenty participants (10.87%) brought the same friend to all four assessment points. To maximize the number of romantic partners able to participate, dyads were recruited if they had an eligible romantic partner at any time within a span of three years to complete observational and questionnaire measures. Participants reported an average relationship length of 1.18 years (SD = 1.25 years). At the age 24 data collection, 84 dyads (46% of the original sample) were eligible and agreed to participate. Females were significantly more likely to participate between ages 18 and 26 than males (χ2 = 5.20, p = .02). Rather, it simply takes into account distributional characteristics of data in the full sample so as to provide the least biased estimates of parameters obtained when some data are missing (Arbuckle, 1996). MeasuresPsychological control from parents (Age 13).Adolescents completed the 10-item Psychological Control vs. RSA withdrawal under stress reflects reduced parasympathetic activity and helps prepare the body for mobilization (Porges, 2007). RSA withdrawal under stress reflects reduced parasympathetic activity and helps prepare the body for mobilization (Porges, 2007). The coding system employed yields ratings from zero to four for each participant’s overall behavior toward his/her partner in the interaction with lower scores indicating more withdrawal (Allen, Hauser, Bell, & McElhaney, 2000; Allen et al , 1994). Participants’ and partners’ scores were averaged together to capture the amount of autonomy and relatedness shown at the dyadic level, an approach previously found to yield highly valid data (Allen et al , 2003). Although Cronbach’s alpha is not a perfect indicator for a rank system, internal consistency was classified as poor (Cronbach’s α = .53-.57).Coping via denial (Ages 22-24).We used the two-item denial coping subscale from the Brief COPE, as reported by the participant’s identified close friend. Although Cronbach’s alpha is not a perfect indicator for a rank system, internal consistency was classified as poor (Cronbach’s α = .53-.57).Coping via denial (Ages 22-24).We used the two-item denial coping subscale from the Brief COPE, as reported by the participant’s identified close friend. 