Human SEPT9 locus SEPT9, with demonstrated roles in both cancer and neurological disease, provides an illustration of the diversity of human septin loci. Human SEPT9 became of great interest to the septin scientific community after it was found to be an MLL-translocation partner in leukemia (66). Human SEPT9 became of great interest to the septin scientific community after it was found to be an MLL-translocation partner in leukemia (66). Human SEPT9 became of great interest to the septin scientific community after it was found to be an MLL-translocation partner in leukemia (66). Human SEPT9 became of great interest to the septin scientific community after it was found to be an MLL-translocation partner in leukemia (66). Human SEPT9 became of great interest to the septin scientific community after it was found to be an MLL-translocation partner in leukemia (66). They vary in the 5′-and 3′-untranslated regions (UTR) and at the N- and C- terminus of the protein. They vary in the 5′-and 3′-untranslated regions (UTR) and at the N- and C- terminus of the protein. They vary in the 5′-and 3′-untranslated regions (UTR) and at the N- and C- terminus of the protein. They vary in the 5′-and 3′-untranslated regions (UTR) and at the N- and C- terminus of the protein. The cellular localization of SEPT9 isoforms is largely cytoplasmic in interphase cells, but the SEPT9_v1 isoform has a bipartite nuclear localization signal that may direct the shuttling of SEPT9_v1 between the nucleus and the cytoplasm. SEPT9 is no exception, as it was originally called MLL septin-like fusion (MSF) due to the fact that it was identified as a fusion partner of MLL in leukemias (66). Some research groups published with the old nomenclature while others used their own versions, making progress in SEPT9 research hard to reconcile. These nomenclature changes are depicted in Table 4 by group and year. Throughout this review the nomenclature utilized was established in 2005 by Scott et al  and endorsed at the 2009 International Septin Meeting(76). SEPT9 as a translocation partner of MLL in leukemia SEPT9 as a translocation partner of MLL in leukemia SEPT9 as a translocation partner of MLL in leukemia Lost from the carboxy terminus of MLL is the PHD zinc finger protein-protein interaction domain and the SET domain thought to regulate gene expression through chromatin remodeling (66, 84). However, all of the well-characterized MLL fusion products produce in-frame translated chimeric proteins associated with phenotypic disease variability such as leukemia type and prognostic outcome which provide further evidence that proteins at the varying reciprocally translocated chromosomes are essential contributors to the pathogenesis of leukemia (67, 68, 85). A compelling example of the role of septins in the oncogenesis of solid tumors was the identification of the MSF/SEPT9 murine ortholog Sint1/Sept9 at a provirus insertion site in SL3-3 MLV-induced lymphomas (86), which demonstrated that this septin locus is a site for oncogenic integration. A compelling example of the role of septins in the oncogenesis of solid tumors was the identification of the MSF/SEPT9 murine ortholog Sint1/Sept9 at a provirus insertion site in SL3-3 MLV-induced lymphomas (86), which demonstrated that this septin locus is a site for oncogenic integration. A compelling example of the role of septins in the oncogenesis of solid tumors was the identification of the MSF/SEPT9 murine ortholog Sint1/Sept9 at a provirus insertion site in SL3-3 MLV-induced lymphomas (86), which demonstrated that this septin locus is a site for oncogenic integration. A compelling example of the role of septins in the oncogenesis of solid tumors was the identification of the MSF/SEPT9 murine ortholog Sint1/Sept9 at a provirus insertion site in SL3-3 MLV-induced lymphomas (86), which demonstrated that this septin locus is a site for oncogenic integration. The N- and C-terminal regions vary in length and amino acid composition. The N- and C-terminal regions vary in length and amino acid composition. As a result of these studies, SEPT9 is now accepted as a novel cancer associated protein and is emerging as a potential biomarker for diagnosis and chemotherapeutic response in some epithelial cancers. The Wittinghofer team studied the human septin complex composed of SEPT2, SEPT6 and SEPT7 and found that these three septins form a hexameric complex of two copies of each septin through a GTP/GDP bound interface, which is also crucial for the GTPase activity (6, 7). The Wittinghofer team studied the human septin complex composed of SEPT2, SEPT6 and SEPT7 and found that these three septins form a hexameric complex of two copies of each septin through a GTP/GDP bound interface, which is also crucial for the GTPase activity (6, 7). The Wittinghofer team studied the human septin complex composed of SEPT2, SEPT6 and SEPT7 and found that these three septins form a hexameric complex of two copies of each septin through a GTP/GDP bound interface, which is also crucial for the GTPase activity (6, 7). However, mammalian septins contain multiple phosphorylation sites and they can be phosphorylated by Ser/Thr kinases in post-mitotic neurons (9–11) and by Aurora-B kinase in mitotic cells (12). However, mammalian septins contain multiple phosphorylation sites and they can be phosphorylated by Ser/Thr kinases in post-mitotic neurons (9–11) and by Aurora-B kinase in mitotic cells (12). This suggests that sumoylation and/or phosphorylation of septins might modulate conformational changes that can alter their functional role. Despite the mechanistic differences between budding yeast and dividing animal cells (13), several orthologs of yeast septins were first identified in Caenorhabditis elegans (unc-59 and unc-61), Drosophila melanogaster (pnut) and mammals (SEPT2 (Nedd5) and SEPT4(H5)) (14–17). Despite the mechanistic differences between budding yeast and dividing animal cells (13), several orthologs of yeast septins were first identified in Caenorhabditis elegans (unc-59 and unc-61), Drosophila melanogaster (pnut) and mammals (SEPT2 (Nedd5) and SEPT4(H5)) (14–17). Recent data indicate that several septins, including SEPT2, 4, 6 and 7, co-precipitate with the mammalian sec6/8 complex, suggesting an association of septins with membrane dynamics and vesicle trafficking (28–31). Recent data indicate that several septins, including SEPT2, 4, 6 and 7, co-precipitate with the mammalian sec6/8 complex, suggesting an association of septins with membrane dynamics and vesicle trafficking (28–31). Recent data indicate that several septins, including SEPT2, 4, 6 and 7, co-precipitate with the mammalian sec6/8 complex, suggesting an association of septins with membrane dynamics and vesicle trafficking (28–31). SEPT2 and SEPT11 are required for phagosome formation which is important for cell membrane dynamics (31). These genes were further characterized in Saccharomyces pombe in which mutations led to cytokinesis defects during mitotis. Ihara et al  demonstrated that expression of murine Sept4 is important for the cortical organization required for morphology and motility of the sperm flagellum (43). SEPT14 was found to interact with 10 other members of the human septins and localized with actin stress fibers, a general feature of septin filaments. SEPT14 was found to interact with 10 other members of the human septins and localized with actin stress fibers, a general feature of septin filaments. Septins as microtubule associated proteins SEPT4 has also been implicated in brain pathogenesis by its association with cytoplasmic inclusions in Parkinson’s disease and other synocleinopathies (52). SEPT2 and SEPT8 are associated with neurotransmitter release due to their interaction with the glutamate transporter (Glast) and the synaptic vesicle protein synaptobrevin 2 (Vamp2), respectively (55, 56). SEPT2 and SEPT8 are associated with neurotransmitter release due to their interaction with the glutamate transporter (Glast) and the synaptic vesicle protein synaptobrevin 2 (Vamp2), respectively (55, 56). The mechanism by which these mutations are pathogenic in HNA is still not fully elucidated, but McDade et al  showed that isoforms v4 and v4* have distinct 5′ ends encoded by exons where germline mutations of HNA are found. Septins in cancer Subsequently, SEPT9/MSF, SEPT6, SEPT2, and SEPT11 were also identified as fusion partners with MLL in human leukemic cells (63–66). MLL, the human homolog of Drosophila trithorax, is a common translocation partner in leukemias with more than 80 rearrangements with 50 fusion partners identified (67). SEPT2 and SEPT3 were abundantly expressed in several brain tumors and brain tumor cell lines, suggesting that these family members are potential oncogenes (70). SEPT2 and SEPT3 were abundantly expressed in several brain tumors and brain tumor cell lines, suggesting that these family members are potential oncogenes (70). SEPT2 and SEPT3 were abundantly expressed in several brain tumors and brain tumor cell lines, suggesting that these family members are potential oncogenes (70). In addition, SEPT2 is the only human septin that has been associated with a specific human cancer predisposition syndrome, Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL). In addition, SEPT2 is the only human septin that has been associated with a specific human cancer predisposition syndrome, Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL). In addition, SEPT2 is the only human septin that has been associated with a specific human cancer predisposition syndrome, Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL). 