Of the 135 GAL-positive ICNs that were randomly selected, 130 neurons (96.3%) were approached by CGRP-positive boutons and nerve fibers. Using confocal microscopy, of the 45 randomly selected ICNs positive for either GAL or VIP, 39 (86.6%) were contacted by CGRP-positive boutons (Fig. Using confocal microscopy, of the 45 randomly selected ICNs positive for either GAL or VIP, 39 (86.6%) were contacted by CGRP-positive boutons (Fig. Their phenotype can now be extended to expression of nNOS, VIP, and GAL, in various combinations being found in more than 80% of these neurons, similar to what was found in the duck (Bergua et al  1996; Schrödl et al  2000). Finally, ICNs do not contain ChAT, and therefore, do not fall in the class of “classical” parasympathetic neurons.We found ChAT-positive nerve fibers coursing within the choroidal stroma as well as forming perivascular plexuses. Addressing these issues is necessary to prepare the morphological basis for upcoming lesion and pharmacological experiments to elucidate function. Pterygopalatine ganglion (PPG)Input from the PPG to the choroid is well established in mammals and birds (Cuthbertson et al  1997; Ruskell 1970; Stone and Kuwayama 1989); these neurons co-express nNOS, VIP, and ChAT (Cuthbertson et al  1997, 2003; Hanazawa et al  1997; Kirch et al  1995; Schrödl et al  2000; Stone and Kuwayama 1989; Uddman et al  1980). VMAT2 has an affinity for serotonin, dopamine, nor-adrenaline, and adrenaline (Peter et al  1994), and so, cannot be used as an exclusion marker. In fact, early studies of sympathetic innervation of the chicken eye were based on fluorescence-histochemical methods that did not discriminate between the different catecholamines (Ehinger 1967; Guglielmone and Cantino 1982; Kirby et al  1978); therefore, it is unknown which catecholamines are used by the sympathetics in chicken eyes. In fact, early studies of sympathetic innervation of the chicken eye were based on fluorescence-histochemical methods that did not discriminate between the different catecholamines (Ehinger 1967; Guglielmone and Cantino 1982; Kirby et al  1978); therefore, it is unknown which catecholamines are used by the sympathetics in chicken eyes. In fact, early studies of sympathetic innervation of the chicken eye were based on fluorescence-histochemical methods that did not discriminate between the different catecholamines (Ehinger 1967; Guglielmone and Cantino 1982; Kirby et al  1978); therefore, it is unknown which catecholamines are used by the sympathetics in chicken eyes. In fact, early studies of sympathetic innervation of the chicken eye were based on fluorescence-histochemical methods that did not discriminate between the different catecholamines (Ehinger 1967; Guglielmone and Cantino 1982; Kirby et al  1978); therefore, it is unknown which catecholamines are used by the sympathetics in chicken eyes. In accordance, dopamine has been shown to be involved in the regulation of choroidal blood flow (Reitsamer et al  2004).There was a remarkably high number (about 21% of total) of NADPH-d-positive neurons in the SCG, which, to our knowledge, has not previously been found in birds (although it has been shown in some mammals; Grimes et al  1995; Hisa et al  1995; Tseng et al  2000, but see also Dun et al  1993; Edvinsson et al  2001; Vanhatalo and Soinila 1994). TissueTwenty eight heads of chicken (Gallus domesticus) were obtained from a local poultry farm. The presence of SOM in the trigeminal ganglion of mammals (Lazarov 2002) is interpreted as a species difference. Single lesions of neither the ciliary nor the PPG pathways result in significant changes in the ability of the choroid to respond to defocus. Single lesions of neither the ciliary nor the PPG pathways result in significant changes in the ability of the choroid to respond to defocus. Single lesions of neither the ciliary nor the PPG pathways result in significant changes in the ability of the choroid to respond to defocus. Single lesions of neither the ciliary nor the PPG pathways result in significant changes in the ability of the choroid to respond to defocus. However, intriguingly, lesions of both pathways together result in a diminished response of the choroid to myopic defocus (Nickla and Schrödl 2008). However, intriguingly, lesions of both pathways together result in a diminished response of the choroid to myopic defocus (Nickla and Schrödl 2008). However, intriguingly, lesions of both pathways together result in a diminished response of the choroid to myopic defocus (Nickla and Schrödl 2008). The definitive role for the various possible players in this response awaits the ability to selectively lesion the ICNs. After a 5-min rinse in Tris-buffered saline (TBS; Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany), slides were incubated for 1 h at RT in TBS containing 10% donkey serum (Dianova, Hamburg, Germany), 1% BSA (Roth), and 0.5% Triton X-100 (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). After a 5-min rinse, slides were incubated with antibodies for double and triple labeling of the markers listed in Table 1.Followed by a rinse in TBS (four times 5 min), binding sites of primary antibodies were visualized by corresponding Cy2- or FITC-, Cy3-, and Cy5-tagged antisera (Dianova; 1:750) in TBS, containing 1% BSA and 0.5% Triton X-100 (1 h at RT) followed by another rinse in TBS (four times 5 min). Slides were embedded in TBS-glycerol (1:1 at pH 8.6).For all antibodies used, negative controls were carried out by replacement of primary antisera by normal serum from those species in which the primary antibodies were raised, or TBS, and resulted in no staining. Slides were incubated in the following solution (1 h at 37°C): 1 mg NADPH (Biomol, Hamburg, Germany) and 0.25 mg nitroblue-tetrazolium chloride (Biomol) per ml PBS, containing 0.5% Triton X-100 (Merck). These intrinsic neurons exist in some primates including man and avians, but are absent or scarce in rodents, cats, and rabbits (Flügel-Koch et al  1994; Flügel et al  1994; Ramirez et al  1999). DocumentationIn order to document double and triple immunohistochemistry, a confocal laser scanning microscope (Bio-Rad MRC 1000 attached to a Nikon Diaphot 300 and equipped with a krypton–argon laser, ALC, Salt Lake City, USA; ×20 dry or ×40 and ×60 oil immersion objective lenses, with numeric apertures 0.75, 1.30, and 1.4, respectively; Nikon, Düsseldorf, Germany) was applied. In order to demonstrate putative synaptic contacts, single sections of z staples of same planes in two different channels were taken and subsequently merged.For quantification, we applied two methods: first, ICN or neurons in cranial ganglia were counted using an epifluorescence microscope [Leica Aristoplan, Wetzlar, Germany; filterbloc I3 for Cy2 and N2.1 for Cy3 (both Leica), with ×25 or ×40 objective lenses] or second, plots were created on screen from confocal images out of merged and un-merged pictures, and co-localization rates were defined (see Fig. To avoid double counting of neuronal cell bodies in cranial ganglia, every fifth section was investigated. To document the NADPH-d/eosin staining of the superior cervical ganglion, a digital camera (Spot RT realtime, Visitron Systems, Munich, Germany) attached to a microscope (Leica Aristoplan) with the SPOT advanced software (version 3.5.6 for Windows, Diagnostic Instruments, Sterling Heights, USA) was used. To document the NADPH-d/eosin staining of the superior cervical ganglion, a digital camera (Spot RT realtime, Visitron Systems, Munich, Germany) attached to a microscope (Leica Aristoplan) with the SPOT advanced software (version 3.5.6 for Windows, Diagnostic Instruments, Sterling Heights, USA) was used. GAL-immunopositive ICNs were embedded in the α-actin-positive smooth muscle spanning the choroidal stroma and suprachoroid (Fig. Double-labeling for nNOS and either GAL or VIP was done on one eye for each marker. 1c–e) was found in 194 neurons (87.3%); 16 (7.2%) were positive for GAL only and 11 (4.9%) were positive for nNOS only. In this eye, 75 neurons were immunoreactive for GAL only (15.9%), while 5 neurons were immunoreactive for VIP only (1.1%). Finally, TH immunoreactivity was not detected in nNOS- or GAL-positive ICN.In 54 randomly selected ICNs positive for VIP or GAL, there was no co-localization with either ChAT (Fig. 2a), as well as in nerve fibers forming boutons throughout the choroid (Fig. To date, there is morphological evidence for one function for these cells: they probably innervate choroidal blood vessel walls and so might influence choroidal blood flow, resulting in alterations in intraocular pressure (IOP). 