The results indicate the absence of evidence for effects at low- or very low-dose levels. Combined exposure at LOAEL resulted in enhanced responses for anogenital index, number of areolas/nipples, delayed preputial separation, and reduced ventral prostate weight in comparison to the individual compounds (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5719133/). Combined exposure at LOAEL resulted in enhanced responses for anogenital index, number of areolas/nipples, delayed preputial separation, and reduced ventral prostate weight in comparison to the individual compounds (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5719133/). Combined exposure at LOAEL resulted in enhanced responses for anogenital index, number of areolas/nipples, delayed preputial separation, and reduced ventral prostate weight in comparison to the individual compounds (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5719133/). Combined exposure at LOAEL resulted in enhanced responses for anogenital index, number of areolas/nipples, delayed preputial separation, and reduced ventral prostate weight in comparison to the individual compounds (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5719133/). Combined exposure at LOAEL resulted in enhanced responses for anogenital index, number of areolas/nipples, delayed preputial separation, and reduced ventral prostate weight in comparison to the individual compounds (https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5719133/). Nonhuman primates are similar to humans with respect to reproductive pathophysiology, including maturation, HPG axis regulation of reproductive function, hormone metabolism, and responses to estrogens, progestogens, androgens, and other hormonally active agents. An integrative approach to reproductive system assessments is more informative than histopathology alone and ideally should include baseline confirmation of age and reproductive life stage, in-life assessments of reproductive parameters, serum hormone measurements, and a thorough and consistent gross pathology protocol. In the wild, reproductive function is governed by matrilineal social rank and animal-to-animal agonistic interactions that act through the HPG axis to suppress reproductive function in subordinate animals. A few key class effects are summarized in Table 1 and Figure 6.Estrogens reliably induce proliferation in the superficial (functionalis) zone of the endometrium, often leading to endometrial hyperplasia. A few key class effects are summarized in Table 1 and Figure 6.Estrogens reliably induce proliferation in the superficial (functionalis) zone of the endometrium, often leading to endometrial hyperplasia. A few key class effects are summarized in Table 1 and Figure 6.Estrogens reliably induce proliferation in the superficial (functionalis) zone of the endometrium, often leading to endometrial hyperplasia. In combination, the gene expression profile of the SERM predominates.102 Other SERMs such as bazedoxifene lack any stimulatory effect on the endometrium but have profound estrogen antagonistic effects both morphologically and in patterns of gene expression.106Soy isoflavones are weak estrogens, roughly one-tenthousandth the potency of estradiol in the mouse uterotrophic assay,107 but they may reach micromolar concentrations in serum after consumption of soy products, which in comparison to the picomolar physiologic concentration of estradiol can result in ERmediated effects. In combination, the gene expression profile of the SERM predominates.102 Other SERMs such as bazedoxifene lack any stimulatory effect on the endometrium but have profound estrogen antagonistic effects both morphologically and in patterns of gene expression.106Soy isoflavones are weak estrogens, roughly one-tenthousandth the potency of estradiol in the mouse uterotrophic assay,107 but they may reach micromolar concentrations in serum after consumption of soy products, which in comparison to the picomolar physiologic concentration of estradiol can result in ERmediated effects. In combination, the gene expression profile of the SERM predominates.102 Other SERMs such as bazedoxifene lack any stimulatory effect on the endometrium but have profound estrogen antagonistic effects both morphologically and in patterns of gene expression.106Soy isoflavones are weak estrogens, roughly one-tenthousandth the potency of estradiol in the mouse uterotrophic assay,107 but they may reach micromolar concentrations in serum after consumption of soy products, which in comparison to the picomolar physiologic concentration of estradiol can result in ERmediated effects. In this estrogen-dominant state without the mucous differentiation caused by progesterone, islands of stratified squamous epithelium form under the normal columnar mucous epithelium of the endocervix (Figure 8).113Proliferative lesions of the cervix and vagina most often occur near the squamocolumnar junction or transition zone of the cervix and are usually associated with papillomavirus infection.114 Lesions are focal or multifocal and may be warty and exophytic, plaque-like, or endophytic. Histologically, lesions consist of varying mixtures of basal cell hyperplasia, koilocytic change, anisokaryosis, and atypia (Figure 9). Papillomavirus lesions may progress to invasive squamous cell carcinoma.113 In addition to papillomavirus-associated lesions, a condylomatous lesion of the external genitalia has been identified in cynomolgus macaques of Mauritian origin; this lesion is not associated with papillomavirus infection and lacks dysplasia and atypia. For example,In vivo:Confirmation of maturity by an endogenous metric, for example, adult dentition and documentation of a regular pattern of menstrual bleedingPlanning for seasonality if studying M mulattaDaily vaginal swabs to assess menstrual bleeding patternsAbdominal/pelvic ultrasound to assess reproductive abnormalities and to measure the size of the uterus and the thickness of the endometriumUse of an isoflavone-free dietRegular biweekly blood (serum) banking to allow hormonal confirmation of menstrual cyclicity retrospectively if necessaryColposcopy for examination of the vagina and cervixAt postmortem:Collect serum for hormone analysisGross photography of the ovaries (one structure on one ovary will be dominant)Organ weights: Ovaries, uterus (separate from cervix at the isthmus), adrenals, and pituitaryTrimming(see also116,117): Assess and record maturity and cycle stageUse immunohistochemistry to assess location and degree of proliferative responses (KI67) and estrogen responses (PR). However, a narrow approach may exclude compounds from such groupings that are biologically relevant. Testicular size can be measured by ultrasound or using calipers. It is widely recognized that water quality is an economic driver.126 Clean water is essential for human and livestock health, and for business development, factories, schools, and agriculture. Similar, independent antiandrogen mixtures studies have been conducted by other research groups, which have produced results supportive of our mixtures studies.36-40 Fish were obtained using backpack or boat-mounted electrofishing (pulsed direct current). Up to 10 male black bass (Micropterus spp), 10 male sunfish (Lepomis spp), and 10 male catfish (Ictaluridae) were collected at each site whenever possible. Any obvious females were released back into the river. Testes were either embedded whole (small specimens) or representative cross sections were taken. After processing, tissue specimens were embedded in paraffin, sectioned at 5 μm, and stained using hematoxylin and eosin. After processing, tissue specimens were embedded in paraffin, sectioned at 5 μm, and stained using hematoxylin and eosin. 138 Whenever possible, 5 cross sections of testis were examined from each fish for testicular oocytes. However, testes from the smaller fish were sometimes embedded longitudinally, and only 3 sections were available for analysis. Oocytes observed within the seminiferous tubules were predominantly in the previtellogenic, chromatin nucleolus stage and were scored at × 10 objective magnification from 1 to 4, with 4 being the most severe (Figure 14). In our most recent assessment, largemouth bass at several Pee Dee River sites closer to the coast had 90% intersex occurrence. Interestingly, the sunfish (Lepomis spp such as bluegills, redbreast, and redear sunfish) had, on average, less than 20% of the intersex prevalence seen in Micropterus, and intersex in catfish was only rarely detected. Micropterus spp also showed higher intersex severity scores on average, with a greater representation of 3 and 4 seconds. In the Yadkin-Pee Dee River basin of North Carolina and South Carolina, principle component analysis identified waterborne PAHs as the contaminants most correlated with intersex occurrence and severity in both Micropterus and Lepomis spp. Even so, there are still several questions that need to be answered, such as: (1) Is there some unique characteristic of black bass that makes them pre-disposed to the intersex condition? Phthalates are environmentally ubiquitous endocrine active chemicals that have established antiandrogenic effects, and human in utero exposure to phthalates is known to reduce fetal serum testosterone- and androgen-dependent outcomes.150,151 Further, early life exposure to phthalates is increasingly linked to the development of allergic disorders in children.152 However, the association between the antiandrogenic nature of phthalates and the increased prevalence of allergic disease has not been established. Often, this data requirement is a limiting factor in populating mixture models. Overall, these studies suggest that male fetuses may be at increased risk due to cumulative exposure of pregnant women to multiple “antiandrogenic” chemicals, even when individual doses are below known levels of concern. Reproductive Consequences in Adult Female Mice Following Developmental Estrogen Exposure: An Estrogen Receptor α-Mediated Estrogen Response, by Wendy N. Jefferson, Alisa A. Suen and Carmen J. Williams Several phenotypes in this animal model replicate findings in humans. Chemicals with estrogenic activity come from diverse man-made and natural environmental sources, including plastics (bisphenol A;[BPA]), pharmaceuticals (ethinyl estradiol[EE]), surfactants (nonylphenol), and plants (genistein [GEN]). Impact of Soy Infant Formula Exposure in HumansOne of the most well-characterized environmentally relevant chemicals is GEN because of the high levels of this compound in soy products, most notably soy-based infant formulas. Cells with a mixed phenotype have a luminal columnar appearance and lack basal morphology, but coexpress both CK14 and CK18 (Figure 3B). All Six1-expressing epithelial cell populations expand with age, and increased Six1 transcript and protein expression closely correlates with the appearance of uterine cancer.63 Examination of human endometrial tissue revealed a similar spectrum of cells that express Six1 and/or coexpress CK14/CK18. All Six1-expressing epithelial cell populations expand with age, and increased Six1 transcript and protein expression closely correlates with the appearance of uterine cancer.63 Examination of human endometrial tissue revealed a similar spectrum of cells that express Six1 and/or coexpress CK14/CK18. All Six1-expressing epithelial cell populations expand with age, and increased Six1 transcript and protein expression closely correlates with the appearance of uterine cancer.63 Examination of human endometrial tissue revealed a similar spectrum of cells that express Six1 and/or coexpress CK14/CK18. All Six1-expressing epithelial cell populations expand with age, and increased Six1 transcript and protein expression closely correlates with the appearance of uterine cancer.63 Examination of human endometrial tissue revealed a similar spectrum of cells that express Six1 and/or coexpress CK14/CK18. This differential association of all 3 activating modified histones persisted into adulthood at this location, suggesting permanent epigenetic modifications. This differential association of all 3 activating modified histones persisted into adulthood at this location, suggesting permanent epigenetic modifications. There was no difference observed for the repressive mark at the time of treatment or later in adulthood. In contrast, over 50% of DEGs have differential H3K27ac at the TSS, suggesting this mark likely plays a role in gene expression differences. In addition, DES-induced H3K27ac at enhancers was no longer observed, showing that both gene expression and enhancer activity require ERa. These data demonstrate that DES-induced gene expression changes and enhancer activation are dependent on ERa. These data demonstrate that DES-induced gene expression changes and enhancer activation are dependent on ERa. These data demonstrate that DES-induced gene expression changes and enhancer activation are dependent on ERa. These data demonstrate that DES-induced gene expression changes and enhancer activation are dependent on ERa. The mechanisms underlying these permanent changes are currently not understood, although there have been studies focused on this in recent years (for review, see66). The mechanisms underlying these permanent changes are currently not understood, although there have been studies focused on this in recent years (for review, see66). The mechanisms underlying these permanent changes are currently not understood, although there have been studies focused on this in recent years (for review, see66). The mechanisms underlying these permanent changes are currently not understood, although there have been studies focused on this in recent years (for review, see66). Application to other weaker environmental chemicals will expand our understanding of how this class of chemicals exerts their permanent effects. Application to other weaker environmental chemicals will expand our understanding of how this class of chemicals exerts their permanent effects. To address these uncertainties, an interagency collaboration between the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences’ National Toxicology Program and the US Food and Drug Administration created the Consortium Linking Academic and Regulatory Insights on BPA Toxicity (CLARITY-BPA) to perform a comprehensive Good Laboratory Practice (GLP)-compliant 2-year chronic exposure study of the toxicity of BPA.69 The regulatory toxicity study forming the backbone for CLARITY-BPA was supplemented by hypothesis-driven academic investigator-initiated studies that analyzed a wide array of additional end points. To address these uncertainties, an interagency collaboration between the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences’ National Toxicology Program and the US Food and Drug Administration created the Consortium Linking Academic and Regulatory Insights on BPA Toxicity (CLARITY-BPA) to perform a comprehensive Good Laboratory Practice (GLP)-compliant 2-year chronic exposure study of the toxicity of BPA.69 The regulatory toxicity study forming the backbone for CLARITY-BPA was supplemented by hypothesis-driven academic investigator-initiated studies that analyzed a wide array of additional end points. Together, the CLARIITY-BPA studies were integrated to leverage the GLP study design, and the analysis of disease-specific apical end points not typically assessed in standard chronic toxicity studies, with an overall goal of increasing the utility of the investigator-initiated study results for risk assessment.69,70 Together, the CLARIITY-BPA studies were integrated to leverage the GLP study design, and the analysis of disease-specific apical end points not typically assessed in standard chronic toxicity studies, with an overall goal of increasing the utility of the investigator-initiated study results for risk assessment.69,70 Results of those studies demonstrated significant and, most often, sex-specific effects of BPA on a variety of reproductive, metabolic, immune, and cardiovascular-related end points.74,78-81 In the heart, minor exposure-related increases in heart weight, left ventricular (LV) wall thickness, and modest changes in collagen content in the extracellular matrix of hearts in males exposed to 430 and 4400 μg BPA/kg body weight/d were detected. By contrast, there were modest decreases in LV wall thickness and decreases in collagen in hearts of females at the lowest BPA dose (5 μg/kg body weight/d). In females, BPA exposure resulted in a marked increase in sensitivity of the heart to ischemic damage and hypertrophy due to decreased collagen extracellular matrix and modified cardiac fat metabolism. Further, the increases in PCM observed in females at PND21, and the notable increase in myocardial degeneration at PND90 suggests that both BPA and EE impact cardiovascular health, resulting in an early onset of vascular dysfunction and progression of cardiomyopathy.82 These findings are clear indicators of exposure-related cardiotoxicity in the 2.5 μg/kg/d BPA group resulting from increases in adverse vascular events, findings that support an NOAEL for BPA of <2.5 μg/kg/d for effects in the heart.It is also notable that largest observed morphometric effects in the CLARITY-BPA study were observed in vehicle control animals when treatment duration (“stop dose” vs “continuous dose”) was compared. The sex-specific decreased weight of males dosed daily with vehicle by gavage is consistent with previous studies, showing that prolonged postnatal stress in males decreases weight gain over time and that female SD rats are resistant to these effects of stress.90,91In conclusion, BPA was found to have multiple effects on the heart, with adverse effects observed at lowest doses examined. The sex-specific decreased weight of males dosed daily with vehicle by gavage is consistent with previous studies, showing that prolonged postnatal stress in males decreases weight gain over time and that female SD rats are resistant to these effects of stress.90,91In conclusion, BPA was found to have multiple effects on the heart, with adverse effects observed at lowest doses examined. The sex-specific decreased weight of males dosed daily with vehicle by gavage is consistent with previous studies, showing that prolonged postnatal stress in males decreases weight gain over time and that female SD rats are resistant to these effects of stress.90,91In conclusion, BPA was found to have multiple effects on the heart, with adverse effects observed at lowest doses examined. The sex-specific decreased weight of males dosed daily with vehicle by gavage is consistent with previous studies, showing that prolonged postnatal stress in males decreases weight gain over time and that female SD rats are resistant to these effects of stress.90,91In conclusion, BPA was found to have multiple effects on the heart, with adverse effects observed at lowest doses examined. Occurrence of effects at 2.5 μg/kg/d dose group, without effects at the highest does groups, was suggestive of nonmonotonic impacts that have been defined in a variety of in vivo and in vitro model systems. Occurrence of effects at 2.5 μg/kg/d dose group, without effects at the highest does groups, was suggestive of nonmonotonic impacts that have been defined in a variety of in vivo and in vitro model systems. Occurrence of effects at 2.5 μg/kg/d dose group, without effects at the highest does groups, was suggestive of nonmonotonic impacts that have been defined in a variety of in vivo and in vitro model systems. Combined Exposure to Low Doses of 3 Antiandrogens in Wistar Rats: Investigations and Results, by Sibylle Groeters 