Most of the fluorescent proteins tested could be expressed with, and separated from, each other. Most of the fluorescent proteins tested could be expressed with, and separated from, each other. Most of the fluorescent proteins tested could be expressed with, and separated from, each other. Care should be taken not to combine fluorescent proteins that heavily contribute to or have high spillover spread in other channels in use. To construct this list, we selected fluorescent proteins that would fit a general cytometer, and opted for monomeric proteins so that they could be utilized as fusion proteins. Importantly, we wanted to ensure that the fluorescent proteins could function as accurate reporters even when expressed at low levels (in the context of a second or third fluorescent protein). We note that mApple, tdTomato, and mCherry, while having high SI, exhibited spillover into adjacent PMTs, and have the highest spillover spread values of the fluorescent proteins from Fig 2 making them less desirable, particularly for resolving dim signals. Specifically, five proteins: EGFP, Venus, mTagBFP2, mIFP, and TagRFP657, can be easily utilized (EGFP or Venus, mTagBFP2 and either mIFP or TagRFP657). Venus represents a good alternative to EGFP in a multicolor panel. For example, if EGFP must be used, the most optimal combination would be EGFP, mTagBFP2, and mTagRFP657. These are similar to mApple and Venus (respectively) and while they are reportedly bright, utility in multicolor panels would need to be determined. Suppl Fig 2Supplementary Figure 2 – Specificity of fluorescent protein co-expression. Suppl Fig 2Supplementary Figure 2 – Specificity of fluorescent protein co-expression. Suppl Fig 2Supplementary Figure 2 – Specificity of fluorescent protein co-expression. Suppl Fig 2Supplementary Figure 2 – Specificity of fluorescent protein co-expression. Suppl Fig 2Supplementary Figure 2 – Specificity of fluorescent protein co-expression. Plots for co-expression (orange) were overlaid with single fluorescent protein expression data (red or blue). Plots for co-expression (orange) were overlaid with single fluorescent protein expression data (red or blue). Suppl Table 1Supplementary Table 1 – Spillover Spread Matrix of the fluorescent proteins ustilized in the co-expression assay of Fig 2. Suppl Table 1Supplementary Table 1 – Spillover Spread Matrix of the fluorescent proteins ustilized in the co-expression assay of Fig 2. Suppl Table 1Supplementary Table 1 – Spillover Spread Matrix of the fluorescent proteins ustilized in the co-expression assay of Fig 2. Suppl Table 1Supplementary Table 1 – Spillover Spread Matrix of the fluorescent proteins ustilized in the co-expression assay of Fig 2. Suppl Table 1Supplementary Table 1 – Spillover Spread Matrix of the fluorescent proteins ustilized in the co-expression assay of Fig 2. Spillover spreading is expressed as the standard deviation of the spillover value into the designated channel. Spillover spreading is expressed as the standard deviation of the spillover value into the designated channel. Spillover spreading is expressed as the standard deviation of the spillover value into the designated channel. Similarly, EYFP was also included because it is a legacy reagent. We demonstrate the utility of five fluorescent proteins with optimal characteristics for multicolor experiments, three of which can be easily used simultaneously (GFP or Venus, mTagBFP2 and either mIFP or TagRFP657). Cell CultureMouse Kidney Epithelial 4 (mK4) cells were a kind gift from S. Steven Potter (CCHMC). 54 μl of Transit LT1 were added dropwise to 600 μl of OptiMem, and incubated for five minutes before DNA and Transit mix was combined and added to a 10cm plate with 4 million 293T cells. Cells were considered selected after >95% of non-transduced control mK4 cells plated to similar density as the transduced mK4 cells were dead. Instrument setup and QC was performed by core facility staff per manufacturer instructions. Cells were treated with trypsin and plated on a #1.5 cover-glass bottom 48 well plate. Flow Cytometry and Data AnalysisFlow cytometry was conducted using a BD LSRFortessa located in the CCHMC Research Flow Cytometry Core (RFCC). Spillover spread [55] was calculated in FlowJo. Cells were examined via confocal microscope (Fig 1A) by plating into individual wells of a #1.5 cover-glass bottom 48 well plate in indicator-dye-free media. As expected, each well containing transduced cells displayed detectable fluorescence (Table 1). Characterization of Individual Fluorescent Proteins by Flow CytometryOnce we confirmed fluorescent protein expression via microscopy, we assessed each protein utilizing flow cytometry. Knock-in gene-expression or fusion-protein reporters can greatly improve the identification of cell populations where conventional surface marker profiling fails. SI gives a value for the detection sensitivity of a fluorescent protein when using a specific laser and filter set. We noted that mCherry and tdTomato displayed the best detection sensitivity in their indicated channels. EGFP, mApple and Venus displayed a moderate level of sensitivity compared to the other proteins. From these results, we concluded that the fluorescent proteins with the highest SI values were the best candidates as reporters for low expression targets. Based on this data, eGFP and Venus are most compatible in a multicolor panel. While dTomato is detected in a separate channel than mCherry, there is significant overlap and it is preferable to use dTomato and not both. Alternative filter selections made the detection of individual signals from EGFP-Venus and EGFP-EYFP signals co-expressing cells possible (Fig 2B). As expected, separation of Venus and EYFP when they are co-expressed is not possible. 