Studies have shown that dolasetron is as effective as the local anaesthetic lidocaine at preventing pain, but may not be as effective in preventing shivering [56,57]. During clinical trials the use of alosetron was shown to be an efficient compound for the effective treatment of female patients with irritable bowel syndrome but post-marketing surveillance revealed several adverse reactions including reports of severe constipation or ischaemic colitis and even death. During clinical trials the use of alosetron was shown to be an efficient compound for the effective treatment of female patients with irritable bowel syndrome but post-marketing surveillance revealed several adverse reactions including reports of severe constipation or ischaemic colitis and even death. The two mutations were located in a functionally important region, the M3 – M4 loop, which contains a number of potential phosphorylation sites and also has an important role in channel conductance and ion selectivity. The two mutations were located in a functionally important region, the M3 – M4 loop, which contains a number of potential phosphorylation sites and also has an important role in channel conductance and ion selectivity. For example, the deletion of the 5-HT3 receptor gene creates knockout mice that exhibit anxiolytic behaviour [80,81] and the use of 5-HT3 receptor antagonists has shown a range of anxiolytic effects [82]. However, many antipsychotic drugs are known to have a broad spectrum of activity, only some of which can be attributed to affects on the 5-HT3 receptor. However, 5-HT2, dopamine and serotonin-selective re-uptake inhibitors are among the most widely prescribed drugs for these disorders and it is likely that these antipsychotic drugs will continue to have a more significant impact. 4.5 Substance abuse and addictionUsing 5-HT3 antagonists for the alleviation of substance abuse has had some success. 4.6 BulimiaIt has been shown that increased vagal afferent nerve activity is associated with binge-eating and vomiting and can be suppressed by the use of the 5-HT3 antagonist ondansetron [100]. 4.6 BulimiaIt has been shown that increased vagal afferent nerve activity is associated with binge-eating and vomiting and can be suppressed by the use of the 5-HT3 antagonist ondansetron [100]. 4.6 BulimiaIt has been shown that increased vagal afferent nerve activity is associated with binge-eating and vomiting and can be suppressed by the use of the 5-HT3 antagonist ondansetron [100]. 4.8 Analgesics and anti-inflammatory actionsPain results from the activation of sensory nociceptors (sensory pain), or as the consequence of damage to peripheral and central nerves (neuropathic pain). 4.8 Analgesics and anti-inflammatory actionsPain results from the activation of sensory nociceptors (sensory pain), or as the consequence of damage to peripheral and central nerves (neuropathic pain). Following tissue injury, the mechanism of pain and inflammation appears to be complex. However, as the effects of this drug can only be seen 3 – 12 weeks after first use, the emergence of nausea in some patients is of importance. It has been shown that the systemic administration of the compounds has beneficial affects for patients suffering from fibromyalgia and the side effects of these compounds are few and often inconsequential. Whether or not these applications are successful will largely depend on further research to prove their effectiveness and the cost savings that these drugs can provide. However, as the development costs of new therapeutics continue to rise, we may find new uses for existing compounds. Future therapeutic applications might also use parts of the 5-HT3 receptor, although this approach has not been pursued as yet. 5-HT3 receptors are located in many brain areas including the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, frontal cortex, cingulate cortex, amygdala, nucleus accumbens, substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area, with highest levels in the brain stem, especially areas involved in the vomiting reflex such as the area postrema and the nucleus tractus solitarius. 5-HT3 receptors are located in many brain areas including the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, frontal cortex, cingulate cortex, amygdala, nucleus accumbens, substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area, with highest levels in the brain stem, especially areas involved in the vomiting reflex such as the area postrema and the nucleus tractus solitarius. 5-HT3 receptors are located in many brain areas including the hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, frontal cortex, cingulate cortex, amygdala, nucleus accumbens, substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area, with highest levels in the brain stem, especially areas involved in the vomiting reflex such as the area postrema and the nucleus tractus solitarius. These brain regions are protected by the blood–brain barrier with the exception of the area postrema and the nucleus tractus solitarius. The area postrema is one of four structures in the ventricular system and, like the spinal cord, is surrounded by an ependymal layer. The structure and function of 5-HT3 receptors shows they are members of the Cys-loop family of LGICs, which includes glycine, GABAA and nicotinic acetylcholine (nACh) receptors. These models indicate that the ligand binding site lies at the interface of two adjacent subunits and is formed by three loops (A – C) from the ‘principal’ subunit and three β-strands (D – F) from the adjacent or ‘complementary’ subunit. Comprehensive reviews of the 5-HT3 ligand binding site can be found in Thompson et al  [27,28]. The transmembrane domain of each 5-HT3 receptor subunit is primarily composed of four (M1 – M4) transmembrane α-helices (Figure 2) [2,29]. The transmembrane domain of each 5-HT3 receptor subunit is primarily composed of four (M1 – M4) transmembrane α-helices (Figure 2) [2,29]. The transmembrane domain of each 5-HT3 receptor subunit is primarily composed of four (M1 – M4) transmembrane α-helices (Figure 2) [2,29]. The transmembrane domain of each 5-HT3 receptor subunit is primarily composed of four (M1 – M4) transmembrane α-helices (Figure 2) [2,29]. M2 residues that lie along one side of an α-helix line the water-accessible pore [30,31], and a kink at the centre of the M2 helices forms a hydrophobic constriction that represents the channel gate. In the 5-HT3 receptor, mutations at the extracellular side of the channel have also been implicated in charge selectivity, and it is likely that charged amino acids at both the intracellular and extracellular sides of the pore concentrate the relevant ions before they pass through the channel (Figure 1) [33]. In the 5-HT3 receptor, mutations at the extracellular side of the channel have also been implicated in charge selectivity, and it is likely that charged amino acids at both the intracellular and extracellular sides of the pore concentrate the relevant ions before they pass through the channel (Figure 1) [33]. A possible therapeutic role for these charged residues is discussed in Section 5 of this review. Each subunit is composed of an extracellular, a transmembrane and an intracellular domain (Figure 1). Although it was shown that the modulatory effects of n-alcohols and anaesthetics can be altered by mutations here, the authors concluded that they did not represent a binding site for these agents [36,37]. The intracellular domain is formed by a loop of ∼ 110 residues between M3 and M4. This difference is the consequence of three arginine residues that lie within an α-helix in the M3 – M4 loop (Figure 1) [40]. The intracellular domain is also known to modulate 5-HT3 receptor function as a result of post-translational modifications. The intracellular domain is also known to modulate 5-HT3 receptor function as a result of post-translational modifications. The intracellular domain is also known to modulate 5-HT3 receptor function as a result of post-translational modifications. Five 5-HT3 antagonists are available for clinical use in Europe at present. The binding site is formed at the interface of two adjacent subunits by the convergence of three amino acid loops (A – C) from one (the principal) subunit and three β-strands (D – F) from the adjacent (or complementary) subunit. Such disease targets include addiction, pruritis, emesis, fibromyalgia, migraine, rheumatic diseases and neurological phenomena such as anxiety, psychosis, nociception and cognitive function. Other possible targets are chronic heart pain and bulimia. Other possible targets are chronic heart pain and bulimia. Fortunately, despite a range of actions, 5-HT3 receptor antagonists do not appear to alter normal behaviour in animal models, and the only typical physiological changes in clinical volunteers are mild effects on gut transit, constipation, headache, dizziness and clinically insignificant asymptomatic changes in cardiovascular behaviour [45]. It is believed that vomiting occurs because of the release of serotonin from enterochromaffin cells of the intestinal mucosa, which results in the stimulation of peripheral 5-HT3 receptors in the adjacent vagal afferent neurons [50]. It is believed that vomiting occurs because of the release of serotonin from enterochromaffin cells of the intestinal mucosa, which results in the stimulation of peripheral 5-HT3 receptors in the adjacent vagal afferent neurons [50]. It is believed that vomiting occurs because of the release of serotonin from enterochromaffin cells of the intestinal mucosa, which results in the stimulation of peripheral 5-HT3 receptors in the adjacent vagal afferent neurons [50]. 