Interactions among Species.Biofilms associated with infections, such as those encountered in CF and otitis media, are typically polymicrobial in nature (bacterial, fungal, and viral).13, 14 The microbes inhabiting mixed-species biofilms exhibit complex interactions with each other, including cell-cell signaling, metabolic cooperation, and competition among the members for available nutrients.15 For example, P. aeruginosa, Burkholdaria cepacia and additional species can form multi-species biofilms in the CF lung and communicate with each other via acyl homoserine lactone cell-cell signaling, which is thought to synergistically enhance their collective virulence.16Hogan and Kolter showed that P. aeruginosa secretes virulence factors and toxins to kill filaments of Candida albicans.17 This work illustrates the competitive nature of interactions among microbes in multi-species biofilms, and indicates that virulence factors associated with infections in humans are also implicated in regulating bacteria-fungal interactions. Furthermore, competition for available resources also occurs between sibling colonies of the same strain of bacteria, indicating that under conditions of limited nutrients, bacteria can resort to cannibalism to survive.18 Considering the role of multi-species biofilms in disease and the inherent differences in virulence among strains of the same bacteria, it is pivotal to understand the complex inter-species and inter-strain interactions between microbial biofilm community members to elucidate the underlying mechanisms implicated in virulence, pathogenesis, and disease progression.In an early demonstration of the potential utility of chemical imaging to understand inter-species interaction (vide infra), Moree et al  analyzed colonies of P. aeruginosa and the pathogenic fungus Aspergillus fumigatus cultured side-by-side on the same agar plate using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization Fourier-transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry imaging (MALDI-FTICR MSI).13 The resultant maps of the secretome showed that phenazine metabolites produced by P. aeruginosa are transformed by A. fumigatus into other compounds possessing different chemical properties. Given that pathogens like P. aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus, and others can infect multiple host cell types, it is critically important that we better understand how the biosecretome of these pathogenic bacteria evolves as they exert dominance.Multimodal chemical imaging – an innovative set of experiments that target the spatial and temporal organization of chemical signaling in microbial communities – constitutes a radical new approach to understanding microbial behavior that addresses the fundamental dichotomy between the spatially heterogeneous way that microbial cells exist and function in nature, and the principal laboratory tools that are used to study them - tools that largely rely on homogenizing bacterial cultures.19–30 Initial efforts to realize the potential of this approach in our laboratories have addressed three primary areas. SIMS imaging and SIMS product ion imaging reveal that FRD1 produces alkyl-quinolones from all three major classes at much higher abundance than PAO1C, but these quinolones are confined to a small thick biofilm region. Interestingly, several additional unidentified components (m/z 294.35, m/z 322.38, m/z 324.38) are also observed in the C60-SIMS ion images generated from the FRD1 and PAO1C 3 and 5-day co-culture colony biofilms. At present, this result remains unexplained, however PAK remains motile even when co-cultured in the presence of an S. aureus agr-QS mutant, which lacks the gene to produce the only known S. aureus surfactant. These results clearly indicate the upregulation of a motility-inducing factor in the presence of S. aureus, thus illustrating the complexity of interspecies interactions and highlighting the need for a spatial mapping of secreted biomolecular signals.As a model system to explore the application of CRM to detailed studies of bacterial co-cultures, we started with the interactions of P. aeruginosa PAO1C co-cultured with E.coli DH5α. The CRM microspectra are sufficiently strong to render strong, assignable features in the loading plot, Figure 5(b). Further complicating the picture, much of what we know regarding the chemical profile of bacterial communities arises from homogenized samples and extrapolation of nucleic acid profile data - an approach which obliterates spatial relationships - yet we know that most organisms occupy 2D and 3D space heterogeneously.5, 6It is widely appreciated that microbial community behavior is strongly coupled to a set of genetically-regulated chemical signals – a system known collectively as quorum sensing (QS) – that correlate with cell density. The inter-cellular signaling process known as quorum sensing (QS) plays an important role in biofilm formation and development, both critical to the establishment of an infection. As it pertains to the interaction between P. aeruginosa PAO1C and E. coli DH5α, CRM was able to clearly establish that chemical messaging occurs over lengths scales that can be much larger than the visible size of the colony, the chemical identity of the major messenger, AQNO, and the time course of its presence distal from the original P. aeruginosa inoculation. For example, even at the level of different strains within the same species, P. aeruginosa exhibits highly variable QS networks.7 For example, QS activation of virulence factors was recently shown to act not just upon localized communities after reaching a QS density threshold, but QS signals were additionally shown to influence the size of the community as well as the phenotype of other regional bacteria.8 Further highlighting the inter-connected web of chemical relationships that determine bacterial behavior, Shrout and coworkers showed that nutritional and surface conditions can strongly influence QS-mediated activity, by regulating factors that guide biofilm development.9–11 While it is widely appreciated that QS is important to multi-species interactions,12 it is not currently possible to predict how specific bacterial strains use QS to guide their development into niches, for example those that cause infection.7 This realization disputes the notion that pathogenic differences among strains are easily explained by the presence or absence of one or a few virulence proteins, or that the response to exogenous agents, like antibiotics, is linear. 