Social statusFor social status scores, the frequency of positive nominations and negative nominations (‘liked most’, LM, ‘liked least’, LL) for each child were computed and transformed into standardised normal deviates for like (ZLM) and dislike (ZLL) categories within each class. Children who do not stutter (26.87%) were more than four times as likely to be found in the average social grouping than were children who stutter (6.25%). In each of these three analyses, one cell had n < 5. In each of these three analyses, one cell had n < 5. Thirteen out of the 16 children who stutter were in classroom social groups that contained a higher proportion of children than the mean for all schools. Thirteen out of the 16 children who stutter were in classroom social groups that contained a higher proportion of children than the mean for all schools. Thirteen out of the 16 children who stutter were in classroom social groups that contained a higher proportion of children than the mean for all schools. This could signify a trend for children who stutter to adopt the predominant social characteristic of their classroom group. These data indicate that children who stutter predominate in the vulnerable behavioural categories of seek help and bully victim and are under-represented in the more positive category of leader. Of the trends noted, chi-square tests on the number of children in each category showed that the only significant difference was between the number of children who stutter and the number of children who do not stutter in the bully victim category (χ2 (1) = 10.80, p < .001).To summarize, children who stutter are more likely to be bully victims and to seek help. It was expected that there would be a significant positive correlation between the ‘liked most’ nominations and behavioural categories such as leader and co-operative and between the ‘liked least’ nominations and the negative behavioural categories of disruptive, seeks help and bully. Similarly for the social status ‘rejected’, there was a child with a severe stutter (14.5 words per minute) and another with a mild stutter (2.5 words per minute). There is some previous research investigating sociodynamic factors and their relationship to stuttering and this is arranged for review under the techniques they have used. There is some previous research investigating sociodynamic factors and their relationship to stuttering and this is arranged for review under the techniques they have used. There is some previous research investigating sociodynamic factors and their relationship to stuttering and this is arranged for review under the techniques they have used. Howarth (1987) suggested that pupils reflect teacher attitudes, and this, combined with direct contact, is the most effective way of improving attitude among pupils. These views in society at large do not appear to be reflected in the judgments of children who stutter by their classmates in this study.Children in this study were allocated to social status groups derived from the nominations of their peers. For example, if the classroom group contained a high percentage of controversial children (children who are assertive, leaders, bullies etc., and are therefore liked and disliked almost equally) the stuttering child might well adopt this social identity. One child who stutters (6.25%) was nominated to the behavioural category of leader compared to 12.9% of their fluent peers. One child who stutters (6.25%) was nominated to the behavioural category of leader compared to 12.9% of their fluent peers. One child who stutters (6.25%) was nominated to the behavioural category of leader compared to 12.9% of their fluent peers. However, children who stutter were seen as more co-operative than children who do not stutter.The lack of significant differences between the two experimental groups with regard to classifications to behavioural categories may be a function of the small number of children who stutter in the study. First, the pattern of behaviour indicates that children who stutter are not only aware of their dysfluency but are also aware of the negative reactions it could prompt from fluent peers. First, the pattern of behaviour indicates that children who stutter are not only aware of their dysfluency but are also aware of the negative reactions it could prompt from fluent peers. First, the pattern of behaviour indicates that children who stutter are not only aware of their dysfluency but are also aware of the negative reactions it could prompt from fluent peers. First, the pattern of behaviour indicates that children who stutter are not only aware of their dysfluency but are also aware of the negative reactions it could prompt from fluent peers. The findings of this study have further implications for clinicians and teachers. Specific social skills training and advice on how to cope with teasing and bullying could assist children who stutter in avoiding exclusion from normal social interaction. Schemes such as the DFE Sheffield Anti-Bullying Project have demonstrated that incidences of bullying can be reduced by implementing whole-school anti-bullying polices, environmental improvements and individual work with bullies and victims. Of the 205 respondents that indicated they were bullied at school, 6% reported that the bullying had a long-term effect on their fluency. Around one in a hundred of the adult population persist in their stuttering (Andrews & Harris, 1964; Bloodstein, 1987). The authors also concede that the sample may be limited by the fact that the respondents were a volunteer sample from the British Stammering Association, which may have resulted in a cohort that was particularly aware of the issues surrounding their dysfluency and its effects. The authors also concede that the sample may be limited by the fact that the respondents were a volunteer sample from the British Stammering Association, which may have resulted in a cohort that was particularly aware of the issues surrounding their dysfluency and its effects. The study examined 197 third-grade (8–9 years) public school students, of whom 36 had been diagnosed with moderate or severe speech dysfluency. The data from the study indicated that, with regard to intellectual skills in school and social activity outside school, the dysfluent child held a significantly lower position than that of his or her fluent peers. The results from the teachers corroborated the findings of the peers. The above methods used for investigating sociodynamics that have been reviewed have inherent problems and limitations, and contradictory findings have been reported. In this study, the method of Coie et al  (1982) as adapted by Nabuzoka and Smith (1993) to investigate the sociometric status and social behaviour of learning disabled children is employed. Each child in the social group is interviewed individually. Peer rejection and bullying can have severe and long-lasting effects, as shown in the review by Parker and Asher (1987). Peer rejection and bullying can have severe and long-lasting effects, as shown in the review by Parker and Asher (1987). The schools were located in rural, suburban and urban areas across England (details of the individual schools are indicated in Table 1). They examined low peer acceptance or peer rejection and their influence on later personal adjustment problems such as depression and early school dropout. Kendall's coefficient of concordance between the two judges was significant – Kendall's W χ2(2) = 29.27, p < .05. Initial contact was by letter and 16 of the 25 schools approached agreed to take part in the study. Initial contact was by letter and 16 of the 25 schools approached agreed to take part in the study. Initial contact was by letter and 16 of the 25 schools approached agreed to take part in the study. Initial contact was by letter and 16 of the 25 schools approached agreed to take part in the study. All the children (stuttering and fluent) and the parents of children who do not stutter were unaware of the true purpose of the study. All the children (stuttering and fluent) and the parents of children who do not stutter were unaware of the true purpose of the study. All the children (stuttering and fluent) and the parents of children who do not stutter were unaware of the true purpose of the study. The parents of the children who do not stutter were sent letters via their schools asking if their child could take part in a study on relationships. The parents of the children who do not stutter were sent letters via their schools asking if their child could take part in a study on relationships. The parents of the children who do not stutter were sent letters via their schools asking if their child could take part in a study on relationships. The parents of the children who do not stutter were sent letters via their schools asking if their child could take part in a study on relationships. The parents of the children who do not stutter were sent letters via their schools asking if their child could take part in a study on relationships. The parents of the children who do not stutter were sent letters via their schools asking if their child could take part in a study on relationships. The parents of the children who do not stutter were sent letters via their schools asking if their child could take part in a study on relationships. All of the children (stuttering and fluent) were informed that the investigation was about children's friendships and behaviours.Not all of the children who stutter were on the register of special educational needs at their school. All of the children (stuttering and fluent) were informed that the investigation was about children's friendships and behaviours.Not all of the children who stutter were on the register of special educational needs at their school. Those that were registered were at level one or two of assessment. 