Previous reports showed that apoptotic LE cells are phagocytized by trophoblast cells (El-Shershaby and Hinchliffe, 1975; Parr et al , 1987). Finally, TUNEL-positive cells were only observed after the removal of LE cells, and positive staining was only present in engulfed LE cells at 24:00 hr on day 5, suggesting that LE cells undergo cell death and nuclear disintegration after internalization by entosis. We have shown previously that LE cells begin to lose their apicobasal polarity pending blastocyst implantation (Cha et al , 2014; Daikoku et al , 2011). On day 5, the intrusive trophoblast cells take advantage of the less polarized loosened LE cells and adopt a cell-in-cell invasive behavior to engulf and internalize bordering LE cells to make contact with stromal cells. There is a report of participation of entosis in aneuploidy in breast cancer (Krajcovic et al , 2011). The LE cell death in oil-induced uterine lumens of pseudopregnant females in the absence of embryos also involves apoptosis that occurs much later, suggesting that LE cell death in close proximity to trophoblast cells occurs at a much more rapid pace and does involve entosis. Experimental procedures to analyze implantation sites are provided in the Supplemental Information. TSC CultureCells were maintained in a proliferative state in media (TSC media) containing 70% embryonic mouse fibroblast-cell-conditioned medium, 30% TSC medium, 25 ng/ml FGF4, and 1 μg/ml heparin, incubated in a humidified tissue culture incubator at 37°C saturated with 5% CO2 in air (Sun et al , 2010). Nonetheless, most investigators believed that LE cells enclosing the blastocyst have characteristics of apoptosis, including cellular shrinkage and nuclear fragmentation following implantation on day 5 (Parr et al , 1987; Welsh and Enders, 1993). Cell Tracker AssaysCell tracker assays were performed as previously described (Overholtzer et al , 2007) and are detailed in the Supplemental Information. The general accord was that the apoptotic LE cells are phagocytized by trophoblast cells (El-Shershaby and Hinchliffe, 1975; Parr et al , 1987). In vivo, entosis disrupts normal cytokinesis, resulting in aneuploidy in human breast cancers (Krajcovic et al , 2011). This observation challenges the dogma that uterine epithelial cells undergo apoptosis attributed by maternal responses with minimal role played by embryonic cells in eliminating the LE cells. Our results derived from in vivo and in vitro experiments rather suggest that trophoblast cells engulf the LE cells by entosis. Our results derived from in vivo and in vitro experiments rather suggest that trophoblast cells engulf the LE cells by entosis. Our speculation of entosis operating in the removal of LE cells by trophoblast cells was further reinforced by in vitro experiments of co-cultured primary uterine epithelial cells with trophoblast stem cells (TSCs) both labeled with different fluorescent cell trackers, or co-cultured epithelial cells with zona-free Rosa-Tomato reporter blastocysts. Prior to and upon initiation of blastocyst attachment, changes in gene expression are observed in both LE and stromal cells encircling the blastocyst, suggesting blastocyst-uterine interactions (Das et al , 1994; Lim et al , 1997). In contrast, in the evening of day 5 (18:00–20:00 hr), multiple gaps within the LE lining the lateral sides of the crypt were noted with the remaining epithelial cells showing an uneven apical alignment, indicative of decreased apicobasal cell polarity (Figure 1A). Removal of LE Cells in Direct Contact with the Trophoblast Cells Is Independent of Caspase 3 ActivationPrevious studies have suggested that maternal responses to implantation prompt LE cells in the implantation chamber to undergo apoptosis and that cell corpses are then endocytosed by trophoblast cells (Parr et al , 1987; Welsh and Enders, 1993). These results suggest that a different mechanism operates in removing LE cells in direct contact with the blastocyst trophoblasts. These results suggest that a different mechanism operates in removing LE cells in direct contact with the blastocyst trophoblasts. Cells undergoing apoptosis ultimately show DNA fragmentation, which can be detected by the TUNEL assay (Negoescu et al , 1996). Trophoblast Cells Engulf LE Cells in the Evening of Day 5To further explore the mechanism of disappearance of the LE barrier, we demarcated the LE and trophoblast cells by immunofluorescence of CK8 and junctional protein ZO-1. The results showed that few trophoblast cells on the lateral side of the embryo formed dome-shaped bulges protruding into stromal bed (dotted circles in Figure 3A), and within these bulged trophoblast cells, a second nucleus was identified (red arrows in Figure 3A). The results showed that few trophoblast cells on the lateral side of the embryo formed dome-shaped bulges protruding into stromal bed (dotted circles in Figure 3A), and within these bulged trophoblast cells, a second nucleus was identified (red arrows in Figure 3A). We found that the engulfed LE cells are encircled by LAMP1, suggesting that the engulfed cell is within a lysosome (white arrow head in Figure 3C).Previous studies have shown that neutrophils and monocytes are present close to the implantation chamber at the beginning of implantation (McMaster et al , 1993). To study whether the blastocyst plays an active role in removing the LE cells, we induced implantation-like responses by intraluminal infusion of oil in the receptive uterus of pseudopregnant mice to examine LE cell death in the absence of blastocysts. These results provide evidence that the demise of LE cells in the “pseudo-chamber” is delayed in the absence of an embryo, and the mechanism of LE cell death is different within the pseudopregnant versus pregnant uterus; i.e., the pseudopregnant LE cells after oil infusion undergo apoptosis by the activation of caspase 3 as opposed to entosis during normal implantation. Similar to earlier evidence that MCF7 cells can engulf live cells by entosis (Overholtzer et al , 2007), we also observed internalization of LE cells within trophoblast cells, supporting our hypothesis that trophoblast cells remove the surrounding LE cell barrier by entosis during implantation, and this on-time elimination of the LE barrier is critical to normal implantation. To make the in vitro condition closer to a physiological setting, we repeated the experiments by replacing TSCs with blastocysts, which were collected by flushing uteri from Rosa-Tomato reporter mice on day 4 of pregnancy. Inhibition of ROCK Impedes the Process of Entosis during ImplantationThere is evidence that small GTPase ROCK is required for entosis (Overholtzer et al , 2007). In contrast, our present results show that the removal of the LE for the passage of the embryonic trophoblast cells into the stromal bed involves nonapoptotic cell death by entosis, a process by which one live cell engulfs another live cell. 