Isolation of the lacZ+ cells and subsequent complementary DNA (cDNA) microarray analysis have revealed novel markers that distinguish different populations of liver mesenchymal cells during liver development. Along the dorsal liver surface, the mesenchymal cells were separated from the mesothelial cells by the type IV collagen (Fig. Along the dorsal liver surface, the mesenchymal cells were separated from the mesothelial cells by the type IV collagen (Fig. From these staining patterns, we defined the desmin+ ALCAM+ cells associated with type IV collagen of the basal lamina as “submesothelial cells.” Near the liver surface, desmin+ ALCAM+ cells, not associated with the basal lamina, were also identified in the parenchyma a short distance (3–5 hepatoblast layers) away from the submesothelial cells (Fig. We also demonstrate that fetal HSCs, submesothelial cells and perivascular mesenchymal cells are derived from mesoderm during embryogenesis. Definitions of HSCs, Submesothelial Cells, Mesothelial Cells, and Perivascular Mesenchymal Cells in the Developing Mouse Liverp75NTR was expressed in desmin+ HSCs, ALCAM+ submesothelial cells, and α-SMA+ perivascular mesenchymal cells (Fig. From these expression patterns and location, we classified three populations of mesenchymal cells in developing liver: HSCs in the liver parenchyma (desmin+ p75NTR+ αSMA+/−), submesothelial cells beneath the mesothelium (desmin+ p75NTR+ ALCAM+ PDGFRα+), and perivascular mesenchymal cells in the vicinity of the vessels (desmin+ p75NTR+ α-SMA+) (Fig. Immunohistochemistry analysis suggests that cells showing the desmin+ ALCAM+ submesothelial cell phenotype, but not associated with the basal lamina near the liver surface, are transitional cells between the submesothelial cells and HSCs. These staining data indicate that submesothelial cell are actively dividing in the fetal livers as compared with mesothelial cells and transitional cells. X-gal Staining and Fluorescence ImmunohistochemistryWhole embryos were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and stained with 1% X-gal solution at 37°C for 4 hours.13 For detection of lacZ activities in sections, frozen sections (7 µm) were incubated in X-gal solution as above and counter-stained with eosin Y (Sigma, St. Louis, MO).For immunostaining, cryosections were permeabilized with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) containing 0.1% Triton X-100. Quantitative PCR showed that high expression levels of α-Sma, desmin, podoplanin, and β-actin were maintained in 8-day culture (Fig. Conversely, only 1.3% of the ALCAMlow population attached to plastic well (Fig. Conversely, only 1.3% of the ALCAMlow population attached to plastic well (Fig. Conversely, only 1.3% of the ALCAMlow population attached to plastic well (Fig. Conversely, only 1.3% of the ALCAMlow population attached to plastic well (Fig. The ALCAM− population did not attach to the well (Fig. The ALCAM− population did not attach to the well (Fig. The ALCAM− population did not attach to the well (Fig. The ALCAM− population did not attach to the well (Fig. The ALCAM− population did not attach to the well (Fig. X-gal staining was found in the liver surface and mesenchymal cells (Fig. Immunofluorescence staining showed that desmin+ HSCs, α-SMA+ perivascular mesenchymal cells, and ALCAM+ submesothelial cells expressed lacZ (Fig. The primary antibodies used in immunostaining are listed in Table 1. These staining patterns demonstrate that HSCs, submesothelial cells, and perivascular mesenchymal cells are derived from the MesP1-expressing mesoderm during development. The current study has led to two novel findings: identification of submesothelial cells and mesodermal origin of liver mesenchymal cells in fetal liver. The current study has led to two novel findings: identification of submesothelial cells and mesodermal origin of liver mesenchymal cells in fetal liver. Based on the immunostaining with antibodies against these and other known markers and location, we defined at least three different populations of liver mesenchymal cells: HSCs (desmin+ p75NTR+ αSMA+/−), submesothelial cells (desmin+ p75NTR+ ALCAM+-PDGFRα+), and perivascular mesenchymal cells (desmin+ p75NTR+ αSMA+) (Fig. A previous morphological study identified capsular fibroblasts beneath the mesothelial cells in the adult rat liver.20 Similar to these capsular fibroblasts, ALCAM+ submesothelial cells in fetal liver are associated with the basal lamina. A previous morphological study identified capsular fibroblasts beneath the mesothelial cells in the adult rat liver.20 Similar to these capsular fibroblasts, ALCAM+ submesothelial cells in fetal liver are associated with the basal lamina. A previous morphological study identified capsular fibroblasts beneath the mesothelial cells in the adult rat liver.20 Similar to these capsular fibroblasts, ALCAM+ submesothelial cells in fetal liver are associated with the basal lamina. We also found that ALCAMhigh cells isolated from developing livers highly express Hgf and pleiotrophin, the two important mitogens for hepatocytes.23 Therefore, our findings are consistent with the proposal that submesothelial cells support hepatoblast proliferation in developing liver. ALCAM expression was detected between submesothelial cells and mesothelial cells at the adjoining side of basal lamina. In chick embryos, mesothelial cells were shown to contribute to both HSCs and SECs.25 Ijpenberg et al 26 referred mesothelial cells and submesothelial cells as coelomic epithelium in mice, and assumed that the coelomic epithelium delaminates and gives rise to HSCs and SECs as proposed for chicken. In chick embryos, mesothelial cells were shown to contribute to both HSCs and SECs.25 Ijpenberg et al 26 referred mesothelial cells and submesothelial cells as coelomic epithelium in mice, and assumed that the coelomic epithelium delaminates and gives rise to HSCs and SECs as proposed for chicken. In chick embryos, mesothelial cells were shown to contribute to both HSCs and SECs.25 Ijpenberg et al 26 referred mesothelial cells and submesothelial cells as coelomic epithelium in mice, and assumed that the coelomic epithelium delaminates and gives rise to HSCs and SECs as proposed for chicken. In agreement with their notion, we frequently observed the transitional cells showing the submesothelial cell phenotype, but not associated with the basal lamina, appear to be migrating into the liver parenchyma. Using MesP1-Cre and R26R mice, we presented the evidence that the three distinct populations of fetal liver mesenchymal cells shown in this study are derived from lateral plate mesoderm. In summary, this study has identified three populations of fetal liver mesenchymal cells that can all be traced to the MesP1-expressing mesoderm lineage. Further characterization of submesothelial cells may contribute to new insights into mesenchyme–epithelial interactions in both liver development and regeneration. Further characterization of submesothelial cells may contribute to new insights into mesenchyme–epithelial interactions in both liver development and regeneration. Complementary DNAs were synthesized from 30 ng total RNAs using SuperScript III and Oligo(dT)20 primers (Invitrogen). Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (qPCR) was performed with SYBR Green PCR master mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) in M×3000P QPCR System (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) as previously described.5 The primers are listed in Table 2. Then, 3.75 µg from each cDNA was fragmented and labeled with Biotin using FL-Ovation cDNA Biotin module V2 (NuGen). The lacZ expression was found in mesenchymal cells in the parenchyma and around the blood vessels (Fig. LacZ Expression in Liver Mesenchymal CellsWe determined whether lacZ+ liver mesenchymal cells express desmin or α-SMA by immunostaining of E12.5 embryos. However, the cells prepared from the LacZ− livers also showed approximately 1% FL1 cells, which appeared to be caused by endogenous β-galactosidase–like activity (left panel, Fig. LacZ+ cells sorted from E12.5 lacZ+ livers expressed desmin messenger RNA, although other cell markers, including albumin, CD31, and CD68, were also detected because of inevitable contamination (data not shown). Table 3 is a partial list of the upregulated genes that include those previously reported to be expressed by HSCs. Table 3 is a partial list of the upregulated genes that include those previously reported to be expressed by HSCs. Confirmation of the microarray results by qPCR analysis was performed for some of these genes (Fig. 