Plasma TNF and CXCL10 levels are increased in HIV+ individualsHIV infection is associated with dyslipidemia due to the combined effects of HIV and certain antiretroviral drugs, which may influence the atherogenic properties of monocytes and sera from HIV+ individuals. Foam cells down-regulate markers associated with immunity and endothelial attachmentTo characterize the foam cells generated in our model following monocyte transendothelial migration, we labelled migrated cells extracted from the collagen with the fluorescent lipophilic dye BODIPY to enable detection of foam cells and macrophages via flow cytometry. The ability of macrophages to exit the neointima and remove cholesterol via reverse transendothelial migration is critical to retarding the development of atherosclerotic plaques and promoting plaque regression [32]. Monocytes from HIV+ individuals showed impaired cholesterol efflux and reduced expression of cholesterol transportersThe above data indicate that monocytes from HIV+ individuals have an increased potential to form foam cells, independent of the atherogenic effects of serum, suggesting that HIV is associated with intrinsic changes to monocytes that may alter lipid transport. In this study, we adapted our in vitro model which couples monocyte transendothelial migration and foam cell formation to determine the functional properties of human monocytes purified from an HIV+ patient cohort. The reduced gene expression of ABCA1 may translate to an impaired ability to remove cholesterol from the cell, consistent with our observation of impaired cholesterol efflux in monocytes from individuals with HIV. The reduced gene expression of ABCA1 may translate to an impaired ability to remove cholesterol from the cell, consistent with our observation of impaired cholesterol efflux in monocytes from individuals with HIV. The reduced gene expression of ABCA1 may translate to an impaired ability to remove cholesterol from the cell, consistent with our observation of impaired cholesterol efflux in monocytes from individuals with HIV. The reduced gene expression of ABCA1 may translate to an impaired ability to remove cholesterol from the cell, consistent with our observation of impaired cholesterol efflux in monocytes from individuals with HIV. The reduced gene expression of ABCA1 may translate to an impaired ability to remove cholesterol from the cell, consistent with our observation of impaired cholesterol efflux in monocytes from individuals with HIV. The reduced gene expression of ABCA1 may translate to an impaired ability to remove cholesterol from the cell, consistent with our observation of impaired cholesterol efflux in monocytes from individuals with HIV. Thus, these findings need to be confirmed in a larger cohort adequately powered to examine the effect of demographic factors including sex and race. Thus, these findings need to be confirmed in a larger cohort adequately powered to examine the effect of demographic factors including sex and race. Furthermore, our findings of impaired cholesterol efflux from monocytes were also made in virologically-suppressed individuals, consistent with our findings that increased monocyte and innate immune activation associated with HIV infection are maintained following viral suppression by cART [20, 21]. Furthermore, our findings of impaired cholesterol efflux from monocytes were also made in virologically-suppressed individuals, consistent with our findings that increased monocyte and innate immune activation associated with HIV infection are maintained following viral suppression by cART [20, 21]. Furthermore, our findings of impaired cholesterol efflux from monocytes were also made in virologically-suppressed individuals, consistent with our findings that increased monocyte and innate immune activation associated with HIV infection are maintained following viral suppression by cART [20, 21]. Furthermore, our findings of impaired cholesterol efflux from monocytes were also made in virologically-suppressed individuals, consistent with our findings that increased monocyte and innate immune activation associated with HIV infection are maintained following viral suppression by cART [20, 21]. Furthermore, our findings of impaired cholesterol efflux from monocytes were also made in virologically-suppressed individuals, consistent with our findings that increased monocyte and innate immune activation associated with HIV infection are maintained following viral suppression by cART [20, 21]. Furthermore, our findings of impaired cholesterol efflux from monocytes were also made in virologically-suppressed individuals, consistent with our findings that increased monocyte and innate immune activation associated with HIV infection are maintained following viral suppression by cART [20, 21]. The HIV accessory protein Nef promotes foam cell formation in these cells by inhibiting cholesterol efflux [45], and high concentrations of Nef persist in plasma of HIV+ individuals receiving cART [47]. The HIV accessory protein Nef promotes foam cell formation in these cells by inhibiting cholesterol efflux [45], and high concentrations of Nef persist in plasma of HIV+ individuals receiving cART [47]. The HIV accessory protein Nef promotes foam cell formation in these cells by inhibiting cholesterol efflux [45], and high concentrations of Nef persist in plasma of HIV+ individuals receiving cART [47]. The HIV accessory protein Nef promotes foam cell formation in these cells by inhibiting cholesterol efflux [45], and high concentrations of Nef persist in plasma of HIV+ individuals receiving cART [47]. The HIV accessory protein Nef promotes foam cell formation in these cells by inhibiting cholesterol efflux [45], and high concentrations of Nef persist in plasma of HIV+ individuals receiving cART [47]. Heightened foam cell formation by monocytes/macrophages in vitro is consistent with increased prevalence of atherosclerotic plaques in HIV+ as compared to uninfected individuals [4, 22, 48], and it would be of interest to determine whether this is associated with altered plaque morphology in HIV+ individuals in vivo. Studying the behavior of these cells is therefore highly relevant for strategies aimed at preventing or reversing the early stages of foam cell formation. Studying the behavior of these cells is therefore highly relevant for strategies aimed at preventing or reversing the early stages of foam cell formation. Our study reports novel data indicating that monocytes from HIV+ individuals, a population characterized by chronic inflammation and immune activation, have a greater propensity to differentiate into foam cells and that elevated levels of TNF in plasma of these individuals further enhances this effect. 2x104 HUVEC were added to each collagen gel and incubated in Medium 199 (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) containing 20% human serum for 3 days to allow confluent monolayers to form. 2x104 HUVEC were added to each collagen gel and incubated in Medium 199 (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) containing 20% human serum for 3 days to allow confluent monolayers to form. Cells extracted from collagen gels were stained with 0.2μg/mL BODIPY® 493/503 (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) in 150mM NaCl for 20 min at room temperature and anti-TNF-PE, CD36-FITC, CD14-APC and CD11b-PE (all from BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) as described [20]. Cells were immediately incubated at 37°C in a humidified temperature-controlled chamber coupled to a DeltaVision deconvolution microscope (Applied Precision-GE Healthcare, Issaquah, WA, USA) and images were captured in z-series on a CCD camera through a 20x 0.45 NA lens. Gene expression analysis of cholesterol efflux and metabolism intermediatesThe expression of proteins involved in cholesterol metabolism and transport was assessed via quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR). Monocytes were isolated from frozen PBMC, rested for 4 hours in RPMI containing 20% pHS at 37°C and total RNA was extracted. Data and statistical analysisNon-parametric, two-tailed Mann-Whitney U test was used for unpaired data and Wilcoxon rank-sum test for paired data. Parametric unpaired t-test was used for data passing the D’Agostino-Pearson omnibus normality test. To investigate whether HIV infection in vivo is associated with increased propensity for monocytes to develop into foam cells, we utilized a refined version of this model to analyze the atherogenic properties of monocytes isolated by negative selection from fresh whole blood. Of the HIV+ individuals, four were receiving cART and had low (80 copies/ml, n=1) or undetectable (<40 copies/ml, n=3) viral loads and the remaining four were not receiving cART and had a median viral load of 23,400 copies/ml (range: 300 to 254,800 copies/ml).When added to unstimulated HUVEC in media containing 20% pHS, a significantly increased proportion of monocytes from HIV+ individuals differentiated into foam cells as compared to monocytes from control subjects (median foam cells 18.9% vs 0%, respectively, p=0.004, Fig. 1A).Consistent with our previous findings, activation of HUVEC with TNF prior to monocyte migration significantly increased foam cell formation by monocytes from control donors (p=0.016 for both pHS and autologous serum, Fig. As seen with unactivated HUVEC, autologous serum from HIV+ but not control individuals significantly increased foam cell formation when monocytes were added to TNF activated HUVEC (p=0.02 vs 0.30 respectively, Fig. 1C), confirming the presence of soluble factor(s) in HIV+ sera that promote foam cell formation. Live cell imaging of monocyte migration in the TEM assayTo investigate the effect of HIV infection on monocyte movement post-migration, we labeled monocytes with the fluorescent membrane dye PKH26, and recorded individual cell tracks within the collagen layer using live cell imaging over 48 hours (Fig. We calculated the distribution of displacement length using tracks combined from at least three independent experiments and found that monocytes from HIV+ individuals migrated shorter distances than those from control subjects (evidenced by a shift to the left in the distance frequency histograms for HIV+ samples, Fig. We calculated the distribution of displacement length using tracks combined from at least three independent experiments and found that monocytes from HIV+ individuals migrated shorter distances than those from control subjects (evidenced by a shift to the left in the distance frequency histograms for HIV+ samples, Fig. In contrast, tracks from HIV+ donors during the later stages of observation (i.e. 