For both supervisors and administrators, rates of turnover were greater in the learning collaborative condition than in the cascading model or distance education conditions (Table 3). For both supervisors and administrators, rates of turnover were greater in the learning collaborative condition than in the cascading model or distance education conditions (Table 3). For both supervisors and administrators, rates of turnover were greater in the learning collaborative condition than in the cascading model or distance education conditions (Table 3). Results indicated that 18% of the variance in clinician turnover was accounted for at the agency level, while 79% of the variance in supervisor and administrator turnover was accounted for at the agency level. Results indicated that 18% of the variance in clinician turnover was accounted for at the agency level, while 79% of the variance in supervisor and administrator turnover was accounted for at the agency level. Results indicated that 18% of the variance in clinician turnover was accounted for at the agency level, while 79% of the variance in supervisor and administrator turnover was accounted for at the agency level. Results indicated that 18% of the variance in clinician turnover was accounted for at the agency level, while 79% of the variance in supervisor and administrator turnover was accounted for at the agency level. Once data files had been created and cleaned, they were imported into the HLM software39 for analyses. Although no analyses were run to compare rates in the current study with those reported in the literature, the rates found in this study (12-month turnover rate of 8% and a 24-month turnover rate of 30% for all behavioral health staff combined) appear lower than rates commonly reported in community treatment settings (30–60% per year).4,40–42 Contrary to hypotheses, no statistically significant differences were noted in rates of turnover across training conditions. The second critical gap within the literature concerns the type of staff member included as a study participant. While additional research is needed to more fully examine the impact of training on turnover, it is possible that the additional effort (above and beyond typical expectations for supervisors and administrators) that accompanies training may influence turnover. While additional research is needed to more fully examine the impact of training on turnover, it is possible that the additional effort (above and beyond typical expectations for supervisors and administrators) that accompanies training may influence turnover. While additional research is needed to more fully examine the impact of training on turnover, it is possible that the additional effort (above and beyond typical expectations for supervisors and administrators) that accompanies training may influence turnover. While additional research is needed to more fully examine the impact of training on turnover, it is possible that the additional effort (above and beyond typical expectations for supervisors and administrators) that accompanies training may influence turnover. Thus, although the learning collaborative condition is designed to promote long-term sustainability of the intervention through increased organizational support at all levels, it is possible that the extra burden placed on supervisors and administrators contributed to their decisions to leave. Perhaps, the learning collaborative activities designed to help supervisors and administrators preempt administrative barriers lead to more negative perceptions of workplace climate. Perhaps, the learning collaborative activities designed to help supervisors and administrators preempt administrative barriers lead to more negative perceptions of workplace climate. It is important to keep in mind that culture and climate are multidimensional constructs. It is important to keep in mind that culture and climate are multidimensional constructs. The subjective nature of many factors that might influence an individual’s decision to leave (e.g., motivations, perceptions of the work environment) may not be adequately captured by self-report surveys often used for quantitative analyses. However, it is possible that human resource practices within some agencies may have precluded the disclosure of employee termination, and some instances of involuntary turnover may have been inadvertently included. However, it is possible that human resource practices within some agencies may have precluded the disclosure of employee termination, and some instances of involuntary turnover may have been inadvertently included. However, it is possible that human resource practices within some agencies may have precluded the disclosure of employee termination, and some instances of involuntary turnover may have been inadvertently included. Similarly concerning is the lack of diversity within the behavioral health workforce. Although more recent numbers for specific job types are not available, there is some evidence that the demographics of licensed psychologists have changed recently. It is important to keep in mind that various characteristics of the EBP examined in the current study (e.g., targeted population, training requirements, in vivo coaching) are not common characteristics across all EBPs. It is important to keep in mind that various characteristics of the EBP examined in the current study (e.g., targeted population, training requirements, in vivo coaching) are not common characteristics across all EBPs. It is important to keep in mind that various characteristics of the EBP examined in the current study (e.g., targeted population, training requirements, in vivo coaching) are not common characteristics across all EBPs. It is important to keep in mind that various characteristics of the EBP examined in the current study (e.g., targeted population, training requirements, in vivo coaching) are not common characteristics across all EBPs. It is important to keep in mind that various characteristics of the EBP examined in the current study (e.g., targeted population, training requirements, in vivo coaching) are not common characteristics across all EBPs. Implications for Behavioral HealthResults of the current study suggest that training methods should be selected carefully, as the training method used may have an impact on more than just training outcomes such as clinician knowledge, skill, and EBP use. Implications for Behavioral HealthResults of the current study suggest that training methods should be selected carefully, as the training method used may have an impact on more than just training outcomes such as clinician knowledge, skill, and EBP use. Researchers have recently developed organizational interventions designed to improve the organizational social context and subsequent training attendance.52 As this intervention has been shown to improve the organizational social context (which is a broad domain encompassing organizational culture and climate), this line of research could be extended to examine the effect of organizational interventions on turnover.Staff turnover is an important problem within the behavioral health field, especially given the recent focus on increasing the number of clinicians trained in EBPs. Third, by definition as direct service providers, they are responsible for client outcomes and are at a higher risk for burnout due to regular interaction with challenging cases.28 However, this focus on direct service providers is a limitation within both the turnover literature and the training literature, given that poor organizational and administrative support is often implicated as both a predictor of greater clinician turnover16 and as a barrier to EBP implementation.3,29 As such, it is of critical importance to consider staff members other than direct service providers (e.g., supervisors, administrators), as they may experience and contribute to turnover in ways not previously explored. Improved understanding of the interrelations between clinician, supervisor, and administrator turnover may help to create training methods that promote improved intervention implementation and sustainability, as well as organizational interventions to increase an agency’s ability to implement and sustain a new intervention. Although PCIT was originally developed to target externalizing behavior problems, it has been adapted to treat a variety of child mental health concerns. ProceduresAll participants completed a battery of assessments at four time points: baseline, 6- (mid), 12- (post), and 24-months. If a member of the research team learned of a staff member leaving the clinic at any point outside of the assessment windows, the team member followed up with the participant to complete the Agency Staff Change Form (described below). Participants without internet access were given the option of completing questionnaires over the phone or on paper. Participants also received bi-weekly group phone consultation for 12-months (24, 1-hour calls over 1 year). Given the problems associated with high rates of turnover, it has been the subject of a substantial body of literature, which has evolved in various ways over the past few decades. However, the primary benefit of a cascading model is that it allows trained clinicians to return to their agencies and function as the trainer for other clinicians, with the intention of promoting more successful sustainability without any effort needed by higher-ranking staff members (e.g., supervisors or administrators). However, the primary benefit of a cascading model is that it allows trained clinicians to return to their agencies and function as the trainer for other clinicians, with the intention of promoting more successful sustainability without any effort needed by higher-ranking staff members (e.g., supervisors or administrators). However, the primary benefit of a cascading model is that it allows trained clinicians to return to their agencies and function as the trainer for other clinicians, with the intention of promoting more successful sustainability without any effort needed by higher-ranking staff members (e.g., supervisors or administrators). Action periods occurred between learning sessions and incorporated the use of improvement data, technology, team meetings, and conference calls to support learning. The intent of the learning collaborative model is to provide the entire organization with the support and resources needed to promote the long-term sustainability of the intervention. The intent of the learning collaborative model is to provide the entire organization with the support and resources needed to promote the long-term sustainability of the intervention. The intent of the learning collaborative model is to provide the entire organization with the support and resources needed to promote the long-term sustainability of the intervention. An online course developed by the PCIT Team at the University of California, Davis (SAMHSA grant; PI: Urquiza) was used for the distance education condition. Demographic information was only collected during the baseline assessment.Agency Staff Change FormThe Agency Staff Change Form contained questions related to changes in employment. These forms were completed by clinicians, supervisors, and administrators at all four timepoints. These forms were completed by clinicians, supervisors, and administrators at all four timepoints. These forms were completed by clinicians, supervisors, and administrators at all four timepoints. As previously mentioned, study team members also completed the form if they learned about a staff member leaving the original clinic at any point during the study outside of assessment windows. Scores on these scales range from 10 to 50, with higher scores indicating more positive ratings of climate or culture.Research has indicated that responses on the ORC have adequate psychometric properties. Participants rated their level of agreement with each item on a 5-point Likert-type scale (same responses as ORC). Because the SOF is geared toward clinicians, there are more items than on the ORC and seven main scales. Data AnalysesAll analyses were conducted either in Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS version 24.0)38 or in HLM, version 7.39 Turnover rates were calculated for 12 and 24 months. Clinicians (n = 100) were primarily Caucasian (91%) and female (84%) and were an average of 39 years old (SD = 10.04) at baseline. Similar to the clinicians, the majority of supervisors held a master’s degree (82%), while the remainder held a doctoral degree. Similar to the clinicians, the majority of supervisors held a master’s degree (82%), while the remainder held a doctoral degree. Most held their degrees in either psychology (32%) or social work (36%). Most held their degrees in either psychology (32%) or social work (36%). The majority of administrators held a master’s degree (68%) or a doctoral degree (20%). The majority of administrators held a master’s degree (68%) or a doctoral degree (20%). The majority of administrators held a master’s degree (68%) or a doctoral degree (20%). 