Thus, CRISPR/Cas9 provides a versatile, modular, and cost-effective means to edit the genomes of multiple model systems (Hsu et al , 2014; Sternberg and Doudna, 2015). This is substantially shorter than editing HSPCs using lentiviral transduction, which requires cloning sgRNAs into lentiviral vectors, generation and quality control of lentiviral particles, and results in variable HSPC transduction efficiencies and risks of lentiviral integration in undesirable sites. This is substantially shorter than editing HSPCs using lentiviral transduction, which requires cloning sgRNAs into lentiviral vectors, generation and quality control of lentiviral particles, and results in variable HSPC transduction efficiencies and risks of lentiviral integration in undesirable sites. The ability to introduce specific mutations in HSPCs will enable the expanded study of cancer-driver mutations in AML and other hematologic diseases. However, most ex vivo manipulations have ultimately been shown to impact function of the most long-term HSCs (Genovese et al , 2014; Hoban et al , 2015), and all of the available assays have limitations in their ability to assess bona fide HSC function. The ability to quickly and efficiently edit primary HSPCs makes it possible to test the function of genetic variants identified in association with hematologic diseases such as leukemia or bone marrow failure. The ability to quickly and efficiently edit primary HSPCs makes it possible to test the function of genetic variants identified in association with hematologic diseases such as leukemia or bone marrow failure. Production of sgRNA and electroporationProtospacer sequences for each target gene were identified using the CRISPRscan algorithm (www.crisprscan.org) (Moreno-Mateos et al , 2015). Production of sgRNA and electroporationProtospacer sequences for each target gene were identified using the CRISPRscan algorithm (www.crisprscan.org) (Moreno-Mateos et al , 2015). DNA templates for sgRNAs were made using the protocol described by Li et al (Li et al , 2013) using primers listed in Table S1. To electroporate Cas9-sgRNA RNPs, 200 ng to 1 μg of sgRNA was incubated with 1 μg Cas9 protein (PNA Bio) for 10–15 minutes at room temperature, and electroporated as above. To electroporate Cas9-sgRNA RNPs, 200 ng to 1 μg of sgRNA was incubated with 1 μg Cas9 protein (PNA Bio) for 10–15 minutes at room temperature, and electroporated as above. When we electroporated c-kit+ HSPCs with in vitro transcribed GFP-sg1, we observed highly efficient loss of GFP expression by flow cytometry, compared to cells electroporated with sgRNA against Rosa26 (R26-sg) (Figure 1A). In the context of this gene-editing strategy, incorporation of an optimized scaffold sequence previously shown to improve Cas9-mediated imaging (Chen et al , 2013) did not significantly increase the frequencies of gene disruption further (Figure S1C).Because the c-kit+ population contains various progenitors besides HSCs, we tested whether HSCs themselves undergo successful gene disruption upon transfection of sgRNAs. Thus, our method efficiently ablates genes in HSCs with minimum impact on HSC survival.With the optimized sgRNA delivery method in hand, we next considered whether Cas9 protein pre-complexed with sgRNA to generate a ribonucleoprotein particle (RNP) (Kim et al , 2014; Lin et al , 2014; Schumann et al , 2015) could also be used to edit genes in murine HSPCs. Numerous genetically engineered mouse models have contributed to our understanding of the pathways that control HSC maintenance and regeneration in physiological settings (Rossi et al , 2012). We note that the T7E1 assay often underestimates the rate of indel formation, potentially due to self-hybridization of the alleles that carry the indel, incomplete duplex melting, and inefficient cleavage of single nucleotide indels (Schumann et al , 2015). We chose to disrupt two polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) components Eed and Suz12, which are both found mutated in human leukemias (Shih et al , 2012). Although this approach produces invaluable insights and still remains a gold standard in studying HSC biology, large time- and cost-commitments are required to generate new mouse models, and the approach is generally not amenable to high-throughput studies. Sanger sequencing and TIDE analysis (Brinkman et al , 2014) revealed that approximately 50% of the sequence reads accrued small indels between 4bp deletion and 2bp insertion (Figure S2A, B). We also cloned individual colonies at later passages and examined the editing status. T7E1 assay revealed that Eed- and Suz12-edited colonies acquired indels, and sequencing verified that they all acquired monoallelic loss of Eed or Suz12 (Figure 2C–F), consistent with the haploinsufficient function of Eed and Suz12 (Lee et al , 2015; Xie et al , 2014). T7E1 assay revealed that Eed- and Suz12-edited colonies acquired indels, and sequencing verified that they all acquired monoallelic loss of Eed or Suz12 (Figure 2C–F), consistent with the haploinsufficient function of Eed and Suz12 (Lee et al , 2015; Xie et al , 2014). Strikingly, all three guides displayed very high efficiencies of disrupting CD45 expression (sg1: 98%, sg2: 91% and sg3: 74%) as assessed by flow cytometry (Figure S3A). These results are consistent with those reported by others using electroporation of site-directed nucleases (De Ravin et al , 2016; Genovese et al , 2014).CD45 knock-out efficiency measured by flow cytometry (73±16%) was confirmed by high-throughput sequencing of the hCD45 locus (75±10%) (Figure 4A and Table S2). As expected for this time point (Goyama et al , 2015; McDermott et al , 2010), engrafted human HSPCs gave rise mainly to B- and myeloid cells in the bone marrow in both Cas9 only and Cas9/hCD45-sg1 RNP engrafted mice, with no differences between these two groups (Figure S4C). A new method to edit the genomes of hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells (HSPCs) should not only accelerate gene discovery research, but also open up new clinical opportunities in using engineered HSPCs for gene therapy. These results establish that our method allows for efficient gene disruption of human CD34+ HSPCs while retaining multilineage reconstitution capacity and the ability of these cells to engraft and expand in recipient mice. Thus, we synthesized guide RNA pairs targeting exons 7–14 of DNMT3A. Thus, we synthesized guide RNA pairs targeting exons 7–14 of DNMT3A. Importantly, the DNMT3A protein was nearly absent 96 hours after disruption of exon 7 or exons 7+8 (Figure 4E). Importantly, the DNMT3A protein was nearly absent 96 hours after disruption of exon 7 or exons 7+8 (Figure 4E). Importantly, the DNMT3A protein was nearly absent 96 hours after disruption of exon 7 or exons 7+8 (Figure 4E). Efficient HDR-mediated gene editing in human HSPCsFinally, we considered whether these editing strategies could be used to introduce specific point mutations into primary human HSPCs using Cas9-mediated homology directed repair (HDR). Single-stranded oligonucleotide HDR templates (ssODNs) were designed with symmetric or asymmetric homology arms (Richardson et al , 2016) to introduce three basepair changes, two of which result in the generation of a BsiWI site near the hCD45-sg1 spacer sequence (Figure 4F). 