Most of the previous studies of pharmacogenomics in transplant immunosuppression have focused on adults. Most of the previous studies of pharmacogenomics in transplant immunosuppression have focused on adults. These patients may have had poor medication compliance or other variations in medication administration (such as dosing with food) leading to level variability. These patients may have had poor medication compliance or other variations in medication administration (such as dosing with food) leading to level variability. These patients may have had poor medication compliance or other variations in medication administration (such as dosing with food) leading to level variability. Although patients were started on the same, weight-based doses of mycophenolate and prednisone, we did not evaluate how these other immunosuppressant doses may have changed during the 1 year post-transplant follow-up period. Although patients were started on the same, weight-based doses of mycophenolate and prednisone, we did not evaluate how these other immunosuppressant doses may have changed during the 1 year post-transplant follow-up period. The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board at UAB (X150803005, 9/28/2015) and was conducted with adherence to ethical principles for research consistent with the Declaration of Helsinki.We obtained whole-blood samples for DNA extraction during follow-up visits in the COA and UAB outpatient kidney transplant clinics from 2015 to 2016. Demographic information and clinical information for the first post-transplant year were collected retrospectively from the medical record.We reviewed factors known to impact TAC dosing, including presence of delayed graft function (need for dialysis in the first 7 days post-transplant) and post-op day of TAC initiation. TAC target levels were 12–14 ng/mL during the first week post-transplant, 10–12 ng/mL during weeks 2–7 post-transplant, 7–10 ng/mL during weeks 8–11 post-transplant, and 5–7 ng/mL at 12 weeks post-transplant and beyond. TAC target levels were 12–14 ng/mL during the first week post-transplant, 10–12 ng/mL during weeks 2–7 post-transplant, 7–10 ng/mL during weeks 8–11 post-transplant, and 5–7 ng/mL at 12 weeks post-transplant and beyond. TAC target levels were 12–14 ng/mL during the first week post-transplant, 10–12 ng/mL during weeks 2–7 post-transplant, 7–10 ng/mL during weeks 8–11 post-transplant, and 5–7 ng/mL at 12 weeks post-transplant and beyond. CYP3A5 genotype was not known at the time of transplant or at subsequent clinic visits during the study period. CYP3A5 genotype was not known at the time of transplant or at subsequent clinic visits during the study period. PCR amplification and DNA sequencing for the CYP3A5 single nucleotide polymorphism (rs776746) were performed at the UAB Heflin Center for Genomics using standard approaches. Secondary outcomes included biopsy-proven acute rejection and CNI nephrotoxicity. Additional exploratory outcomes included development of allograft inflammation (borderline changes or acute rejection), BK nephropathy, and eGFR by the CKD-Schwartz Equation26 at 1 year post-transplant or last follow-up. Comparisons for exploratory outcomes were made using Wilcoxon rank-sum tests for non-normally distributed continuous variables and chi-square or Fisher’s exact tests for categorical variables. There were 4 patients in the expresser group that experienced delayed graft function, defined as need for dialysis in the first 7 days post-transplant, but this difference was not statistically significant (Table 1). There were 4 patients in the expresser group that experienced delayed graft function, defined as need for dialysis in the first 7 days post-transplant, but this difference was not statistically significant (Table 1). Time to reach therapeutic TAC level was significantly longer in the expressers compared to the non-expressers (P = 0.03, Figure 1). Time to reach therapeutic TAC level was significantly longer in the expressers compared to the non-expressers (P = 0.03, Figure 1). A total of 9 patients in the overall cohort did not reach a steady TAC level within the first post-transplant year or last available follow-up, six in the expresser group and three in the non-expresser group (Table 3). Recent studies have sought to understand how to personalize kidney transplant immunosuppression with the aim of improving clinical outcomes. We observed a similar trend for increased early allograft inflammation when biopsies with borderline changes were considered in addition to those with acute rejection (Table 3). The incidence of early CNI nephrotoxicity was high in the overall cohort (60%), but was similar between the expresser and non-expresser groups (Table 3 and Figure 3). Additional analysis revealed that the expresser group had a significantly lower eGFR at last follow-up compared to non-expressers, but this finding could have been confounded by a higher proportion of deceased donors in the expresser group among other factors. There were no patient deaths during the first post-transplant year. There were no patient deaths during the first post-transplant year. There were 5 patients in the expresser group who had delayed initiation of TAC on post-op day 2 or later (latest on post-op day 8); however, this was accounted for in our analysis, as time to steady therapeutic TAC level was measured from the day of TAC initiation. Despite the difference in time to reach steady target TAC levels, we did not detect a substantial impact on 1-year clinical outcomes, although we observed non-significant trends toward increased incidence of borderline changes and acute rejection. Thervet et al6 demonstrated through a prospective, randomized trial that therapeutic TAC concentrations are achieved more quickly when dosing is based on CYP3A5 genotype, although no differences in acute rejection, delayed graft function, or allograft survival were seen. Thervet et al6 demonstrated through a prospective, randomized trial that therapeutic TAC concentrations are achieved more quickly when dosing is based on CYP3A5 genotype, although no differences in acute rejection, delayed graft function, or allograft survival were seen. Since surveillance biopsies were performed as the standard of care at our center, we were able to accurately assess the development of early CNI nephrotoxicity by 6 months post-transplant. However, as late surveillance biopsies were not done, it is not known whether these findings of CNI nephrotoxicity were sustained. 