Considering all nonsense, frameshift and canonical splice-site mutations as truncating, we observed that CEP290, CSPP1 and C5ORF42 mostly harbor a combination of two truncating mutations, CC2D2A and TMEM67 tend to have ≥1 missense mutation, and TMEM216 and INPP5E have mainly two missense mutations. All individuals with JS caused by mutations in NPHP1 (n=5) harbor the previously described deletion [24] in a homozygous state, and no causal point mutations were identified in this gene. All individuals with JS caused by mutations in NPHP1 (n=5) harbor the previously described deletion [24] in a homozygous state, and no causal point mutations were identified in this gene. All individuals with JS caused by mutations in NPHP1 (n=5) harbor the previously described deletion [24] in a homozygous state, and no causal point mutations were identified in this gene. All individuals with JS caused by mutations in NPHP1 (n=5) harbor the previously described deletion [24] in a homozygous state, and no causal point mutations were identified in this gene. All individuals with JS caused by mutations in NPHP1 (n=5) harbor the previously described deletion [24] in a homozygous state, and no causal point mutations were identified in this gene. In three unrelated Brazilian families, the same combination of two CSPP1 RDVs was identified, suggesting that they might in fact be related. In three unrelated Brazilian families, the same combination of two CSPP1 RDVs was identified, suggesting that they might in fact be related. In three unrelated Brazilian families, the same combination of two CSPP1 RDVs was identified, suggesting that they might in fact be related. Gene-phenotype correlationsWe next examined associations between the non-CNS features of JS and each genetic cause (Figure 3, Supplementary Table S9), and observed several significant gene-phenotype correlations: CEP290 mutations with retinal dystrophy (O.R. Even after Bonferroni correction for multiple hypothesis testing, the associations between TMEM67 and liver disease and coloboma, and those between CEP290 and retinal dystrophy remained statistically significant (p<0.0001). Presumed genetic cause of JS identified in 62% of familiesJust over ten years ago, the first genetic causes of JS were identified. Identifying these variants and understanding their significance will require integrating data from variant rating algorithms like CADD, global assessments of chromatin structure and regulatory elements from projects such as ENCODE,[43] and targeted functional assays in affected cell lines, animal models, or in vitro systems. Identifying these variants and understanding their significance will require integrating data from variant rating algorithms like CADD, global assessments of chromatin structure and regulatory elements from projects such as ENCODE,[43] and targeted functional assays in affected cell lines, animal models, or in vitro systems. Our findings validate prior results from smaller cohorts focused on single genes,[44,45,46] and also identify additional positive and negative correlations. Nonetheless, grouping individuals by genetic cause or clinical phenotype retains value for determining their risk of developing progressive features and guiding clinical management as described above. Nonetheless, grouping individuals by genetic cause or clinical phenotype retains value for determining their risk of developing progressive features and guiding clinical management as described above. Nonetheless, grouping individuals by genetic cause or clinical phenotype retains value for determining their risk of developing progressive features and guiding clinical management as described above. In support of this hypothesis, fetuses with Meckel syndrome tend to carry two truncating mutations in CC2D2A and TMEM67 compared to individuals with JS who usually carry at least one missense mutation as previously described. [22, 33, 34, 51] In contrast, virtually all individuals with JS due to mutations in CSPP1 or CEP290 harbor two truncating variants in these genes, indicating that severe loss-of-function is required to cause JS. Identifying the genetic cause empowers individuals with JS and their families to make family planning decisions, and gene-phenotype correlations provide more reliable prognostic information leading to individually-tailored, organ-specific surveillance, thereby improving the health and longevity of affected individuals while conserving healthcare costs. In parallel, identifying the genetic causes of Mendelian disorders is required for developing and applying gene-specific treatments. Subject ascertainment and phenotypic dataParticipants were referred to the University of Washington (UW) Joubert Syndrome Research Program by the Joubert Syndrome and Related Disorders Foundation and clinical collaborators internationally (see Acknowledgements). Joubert syndrome (JS, OMIM 213300) is a recessive neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by abnormal eye movements, respiratory control disturbances, cognitive impairment, hypotonia and ataxia. We used the Combined Annotation Dependent Depletion (CADD) algorithm to estimate the deleteriousness of variants (version 1.1),[37] and considered all nonsense, frameshift and canonical splice-site mutations to be deleterious, regardless of CADD score. The large size of the cohort and world-wide ascertainment based on brain imaging and neurologic findings provide a relatively unbiased spectrum of the disorder. Liver fibrosis and coloboma were strongly associated (Odds Ratio (O.R.) Liver fibrosis and coloboma were strongly associated (Odds Ratio (O.R.) Retinal dystrophy and kidney disease (O.R. 1.7-5.2), liver fibrosis and kidney disease (O.R. 1.6-5.5) and polydactyly and encephalocele (O.R. 1.6-5.5) and polydactyly and encephalocele (O.R. In addition, we observed multiple combinations of features in subsets of individuals, often precluding categorization into one of the proposed sub-types (Supplementary Table S3). This is likely an under-ascertainment compared to prior studies,[38] since detailed review of the brain imaging studies was not part of this study. Other, less common, features included scoliosis (n=28), cleft palate (n=20), hearing loss (n=16), tongue tumors (n=17), oral frenulae (n=9), heart defects (n=7), and a variety of mental health problems such as anxiety, aggression, depression and autism (total n=47). Using this definition and all available sequencing data, we identified the presumed genetic cause in 279 individuals from 232/375 families (62%) overall (Figure 2), 77% in consanguineous families, and 76% in families with >1 affected individual. In contrast to the results in affected individuals, 5/182 unrelated control individuals carried ≥2 RDVs in one of the known genes (Supplementary Table S5). In contrast to the results in affected individuals, 5/182 unrelated control individuals carried ≥2 RDVs in one of the known genes (Supplementary Table S5). In contrast to the results in affected individuals, 5/182 unrelated control individuals carried ≥2 RDVs in one of the known genes (Supplementary Table S5). In contrast to the results in affected individuals, 5/182 unrelated control individuals carried ≥2 RDVs in one of the known genes (Supplementary Table S5). a homozygous frameshift mutation in C5ORF42 versus two missense variants in CSPP1, which harbors exclusively truncating mutations in our cohort). Of note, based on the clinical information available, the phenotypic severity in these individuals was not substantially different from the rest of the cohort.Including only the families with conservatively called genetic causes, five genes (C5ORF42, CC2D2A, AHI1, CEP290, TMEM67) each account for JS in ~6-9% of JS, three genes (CSPP1, TMEM216 and INPP5E) for ~3% each, and six genes for ~1-2%, while the remaining nine genes each account for JS in only 1-2 families. We also identified B9D2 mutations as the genetic cause in two families, further extending the known genetic overlap between JS and the more severe Meckel syndrome. We also identified B9D2 mutations as the genetic cause in two families, further extending the known genetic overlap between JS and the more severe Meckel syndrome. A single affected individual carries one synonymous and one missense variant in TTC21B; however, this individual also carries a homozygous nonsense variant in C2CD3 that is predicted to truncate the protein near the N-terminus (Supplementary Table S6).Further examination of the sequence data revealed variation in the types of mutations across the different genes. 