Thus secondary analyses tested whether dispositional mindfulness is associated with TSST responses while controlling for these four traits. To control for diurnal cortisol variation, all laboratory sessions were completed on weekdays between 2pm and 7pm. Baseline salivary cortisol and self-reported state negative affectivity and state anxiety were first collected 5–10 min after laboratory arrival. At standardized intervals over the next 45 minutes, saliva samples and affect measures were collected while participants rested (see State Measures below). At standardized intervals over the next 45 minutes, saliva samples and affect measures were collected while participants rested (see State Measures below). At standardized intervals over the next 45 minutes, saliva samples and affect measures were collected while participants rested (see State Measures below). Dispositional MeasuresMindfulnessThe 15-item Mindful Attention Awareness Scale (MAAS; Brown & Ryan, 2003) assessed the frequency of open attentiveness to and awareness of present events and experiences using a 6-point Likert scale (almost always to almost never). An example item is, “I find myself preoccupied with the future or the past.” Higher scores indicate higher mindfulness (sample α = .95).Perceived stressThe 10-item version of the Perceived Stress Scale (PSS; Cohen, Kamarck & Mermelstein, 1983) assessed the extent to which life situations are appraised as stressful (α = .84).AnxietyThe 9-item Profile of Mood States anxiety subscale (POMS; McNair, Lorr, & Droppleman, 1971) assessed anxiety over the past week (α = .93), while the Taylor Manifest Anxiety Scale (TMAS; Taylor, 1953) measured anxiety symptoms in general (α = .88).Negative affectivityThe Positive Affectivity Negative Affectivity Schedule (PANAS; Watson, Clark, & Tellegen, 1988) assessed affective arousal over the past week (α = .88).Fear of negative evaluationThe 12-item Fear of Negative Evaluation Scale (FNE; Leary, 1983) measured a form of social anxiety particularly relevant to the TSST environment (α = .93). Samples were collected via 2-min sublingual placement of synthetic Salivettes (Salimetrics, State College, PA) at baseline, immediately after the speech task (10 min from task onset), and 10, 20, and 35 min after the tasks (20, 30, and 45 min from task onset). Inter-assay coefficient of variation (CV) was 6.69—6.88%, intra-assay CV was 3.88—7.12%, and the sensitivity was < 0.007 ug/dL.AnxietyThe POMS anxiety subscale assessed anxiety “currently” at baseline (α = .88), and at 10, 20, and 35 min after the tasks (20, 30, and 45 min from task onset).Negative affectivityThe NA portion of the PANAS assessed negative affectivity “right now” (baseline α = .87) on the same assessment schedule as with POMS anxiety. Among the participant covariates, later session times predicted lower cortisol responses [F(1,41) = 9.31, p = .004] and males reported higher NA [F(1,63) = 11.90, p = .001] and anxiety [F(1,62) = 9.77, p = .003]. Primary AnalysesThe primary analyses examined whether mindfulness moderated the three response curves observed in the TSST relative to the control condition. Secondary AnalysesAmong the non-mindfulness dispositional measures and the baseline affect measures, separate mixed model analyses showed that only dispositional fear of negative evaluation predicted cortisol responses [F(1,40) = 4.24, p = .05]; those with lower scores showed elevated cortisol across conditions. Consistent with the mindfulness stress-buffering hypothesis, this experiment found that cortisol responses to a social evaluative threat task was moderated by dispositional mindfulness, such that more mindful individuals showed an attenuated cortisol response to the Trier Social Stress Test relative to a control task. But the comparatively small sample may have limited the potential for observing significant predictions among some control variables. However the stress buffering effects held when controlling for these study variables. Second, future research should control for rumination and other social anxiety indicators to rule out alternative interpretations of the findings, as both traits have been associated with both mindfulness (Brown & Ryan, 2003) and TSST cortisol responses (e.g., Zoccola, Quas, & Yim, 2010). 