3E), demonstrating that nuclear ANG is not involved in the AKT phosphorylation pathway and that neamine does not affect AKT transgene expression and phosphorylation. We did not notice any adverse reactions of the animals after neamine treatment. We did not notice any adverse reactions of the animals after neamine treatment. We did not notice any adverse reactions of the animals after neamine treatment. We did not notice any adverse reactions of the animals after neamine treatment. Both the numbers and size of the NOR reflect the degree of ribosome biogenesis (25). Moreover recent work has shown ANG to play a direct role in prostate cancer proliferation (1, 10), making inhibition of ANG an even more attractive target for cancer drug development. Nuclear translocation of ANG seems to be essential for its biological function (6). Nuclear translocation of ANG seems to be essential for its biological function (6). In efforts to understand the mechanism by which ANG is translocated to the nucleus of endothelial cells, neomycin was discovered to block nuclear translocation of ANG and to inhibit ANG-induced cell proliferation and angiogenesis (18). The nephrotoxicity of neomycin is associated with selective accumulation in the kidney where the cortical levels may reach as high as 20 times those of circulating levels in serum. Since neamine appears to be less toxic than streptomycin, the dose we used in this study (30 mg/kg s. c., and 10 mg/kg i.p.) Indeed we did not see any acute or chronic adverse side effects in experiments with these mice. Neamine is effective in inhibiting prostate cancer growth in both the xenograft and spontaneous mouse models. Neamine is effective in inhibiting prostate cancer growth in both the xenograft and spontaneous mouse models. With the xenograft animal model, neamine prevented the establishment of PC-3 cell tumors in 50% of the animals with an overall inhibition of 72.5% in the growth rate (Fig. AKT kinase activity is frequently elevated in prostate cancers (35). Mouse ANG is the most significantly up-regulated gene in the prostate during PIN development in AKT transgenic mice (4). Mouse ANG is the most significantly up-regulated gene in the prostate during PIN development in AKT transgenic mice (4). Mouse ANG is the most significantly up-regulated gene in the prostate during PIN development in AKT transgenic mice (4). In these mice, expression of AKT in the ventral prostate results in activation of the p70S6K pathway and induction of PIN similar in character to that observed in PTEN+/− mice (36). Mutation of PTEN leads to deregulated PI3K signaling, resulting in constitutive activation of downstream targets including the AKT kinase family. This class of mRNAs includes ribosomal proteins, elongation factors 1A1 and 1A2, and several other proteins involved in ribosome biogenesis or in translation control (41). Neamine treatment of the MPAKT mice that have fully developed PIN inhibited rRNA transcription, induced cell proliferation, resulting in a reversal of PIN phenotype and normalization of the luminal architecture. Neomycin, an aminoglycoside antibiotic, has been shown to block nuclear translocation of ANG (18) and to inhibit xenograft growth of human prostate cancer cells in athymic mice (1). We have now established that neamine (20), a nontoxic degradation product of neomycin, effectively inhibits nuclear translocation of ANG (12). It has also been shown to inhibit angiogenesis induced both by ANG and by bFGF and VEGF (9). Therefore, we examined its capacity to prevent the establishment and to inhibit the growth of PC-3 human prostate cancer cells in mice, as well as its capacity to prevent and to reverse AKT-induced PIN in MPAKT mice. A breeding pair of MPAKT mice was provided by Dr. W. R. Sellers of Dana Farber Cancer Institute. Tumor sizes were measured every 3 days and recorded in mm3 (length × width2, the longer side of the tumor was designated as the length). Mice were sacrificed at day 56 and the tumors were removed and the wet weights of the PC-3 tumors were recorded. Mice were sacrificed at day 56 and the tumors were removed and the wet weights of the PC-3 tumors were recorded. injection of PBS or neamine at a dose of 10 mg/kg body weight for 4 weeks. The animals were sacrificed and the entire genitourinary tract was removed and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and embedded in paraffin. The animals were sacrificed and the entire genitourinary tract was removed and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde and embedded in paraffin. Immunohistochemistry (IHC)Tissue sections of 4 μm were hydrated, incubated for 30 min with 3% H2O2 in methanol at RT, washed with H2O and PBS, and microwaved in 10 mM citrate buffer, pH 6.0, for 10 min. In situ hybridization (ISH) for 47S rRNARiboprobes for human and mouse 47S rRNA were prepared and labeled with digoxigenin as described by Qian et al  (23). Digoxigenin-labeled probes were generated by in vitro transcription from the above PCR templates using Digoxigenin RNA labeling Kit (Roche Diagnostics). The control probe was the digoxigenin-labeled “antisense” Neo transcripts of 760 bases in length, which was transcribed by T7 RNA polymerase according to the standard protocol using pSPT18-Neo as the template. The control probe was the digoxigenin-labeled “antisense” Neo transcripts of 760 bases in length, which was transcribed by T7 RNA polymerase according to the standard protocol using pSPT18-Neo as the template. After proteinase K treatment (1.5 μg/ml for 10 min at RT) and acetylation reaction (0.25% acetic anhydride in 0.1 mM Triethanolamine at RT for 20 min), the sections were washed with 4 × SSC, prehybridized at 45 °C for 1 h in 5 × SSC containing 50% formamide, 0.5 mg/ml heparin, and 0.1 mg/ml salmon sperm DNA. Hybridization was carried out in the same buffer as prehybridization but containing 800 ng/ml digoxigenin labeled probe at 45 °C for 16 h. After successive washing in 4 × SSC (1 min at RT), 50% formamide in 2 × SSC/(1 h at 45 °C), 0.1 × SSC (2 h at 45 °C), TTBS (5 min at RT), the hybridization signal was visualized using an alkaline phosphatase-conjugated anti-digoxigenin antibody with nitroblue tetrazolium/5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate as the substrate. Silver staining of nucleolar organizer region (NOR)Formalin-fixed tissue sections were deparaffinized in xylene, rehydrated in ethanol and H2O, immersed in 10 mM sodium citrate buffer, pH 6.0, and autoclaved in at 120 °C for 20 min. Silver staining of nucleolar organizer region (NOR)Formalin-fixed tissue sections were deparaffinized in xylene, rehydrated in ethanol and H2O, immersed in 10 mM sodium citrate buffer, pH 6.0, and autoclaved in at 120 °C for 20 min. At day 56, when all animals were sacrificed, the average tumor weight in the control and neamine-treated groups was 620 ± 310 and 170 ± 50 mg, respectively (Fig. At day 56, when all animals were sacrificed, the average tumor weight in the control and neamine-treated groups was 620 ± 310 and 170 ± 50 mg, respectively (Fig. At day 56, when all animals were sacrificed, the average tumor weight in the control and neamine-treated groups was 620 ± 310 and 170 ± 50 mg, respectively (Fig. At day 56, when all animals were sacrificed, the average tumor weight in the control and neamine-treated groups was 620 ± 310 and 170 ± 50 mg, respectively (Fig. Since the function of nuclear ANG is known to be related to rRNA transcription, we used in situ hybridization (ISH) with a probe specific for the initiation site of the 47S rRNA precursor to clarify the effect of neamine on rRNA transcription. To understand whether ANG is involved in AKT-induced prostate epithelial cell proliferation and PIN formation, we have treated 4-week-old MPAKT mice with neamine at a daily i.p. 3D), indicating blockage of nuclear translocation of ANG in the prostate epithelial cells. 3D), indicating blockage of nuclear translocation of ANG in the prostate epithelial cells. 3D), indicating blockage of nuclear translocation of ANG in the prostate epithelial cells. 