To generate channel flow, the inlets are connected to constant pressure reservoirs and the outlets to a syringe pump set to maintain a constant flow rate (time-varying flows are also possible, but have not yet been tested). To generate channel flow, the inlets are connected to constant pressure reservoirs and the outlets to a syringe pump set to maintain a constant flow rate (time-varying flows are also possible, but have not yet been tested). To generate channel flow, the inlets are connected to constant pressure reservoirs and the outlets to a syringe pump set to maintain a constant flow rate (time-varying flows are also possible, but have not yet been tested). Characterization of capillary morphogenesis and tube-like structuresPhase-contrast, epifluoresence and confocal microscopy were used to characterize capillary morphogenesis and the 3D morphology of EC structures. Characterization of capillary morphogenesis and tube-like structuresPhase-contrast, epifluoresence and confocal microscopy were used to characterize capillary morphogenesis and the 3D morphology of EC structures. Fluorescent and phase contrast images were acquired on Nikon TE300 microscope equipped with a Hamamatsu camera and Openlab image acquisition software. Confocal images were collected using spinning disk confocal microscope (Zeiss Axiovert 200M) furnished with Imaging Suite (PerkinsElmer Life Science) acquisition software. Confocal images were collected using spinning disk confocal microscope (Zeiss Axiovert 200M) furnished with Imaging Suite (PerkinsElmer Life Science) acquisition software. The aligned images were stacked and rendered for 3D visualization using Imaris (Bitplane, MN). The in vivo microenvironment is an integration of a complex array of global as well as local stimuli and interactions that can be categorized as either biochemical or biophysical in nature. The in vivo microenvironment is an integration of a complex array of global as well as local stimuli and interactions that can be categorized as either biochemical or biophysical in nature. The in vivo microenvironment is an integration of a complex array of global as well as local stimuli and interactions that can be categorized as either biochemical or biophysical in nature. The in vivo microenvironment is an integration of a complex array of global as well as local stimuli and interactions that can be categorized as either biochemical or biophysical in nature. The μFD was kept in a custom built environmental control chamber at 37 ºC and 5% CO2 and cells visualized with a Zeiss inverted microscope. The device was then placed in a secondary container with a humidified local environment and cut-out glass window in the bottom for visualization. The fixed samples were rinsed twice with 1X phosphate buffered saline (PBS), treated with 0.1 % Triton-X (1–2 minutes), rinsed with 1X PBS followed by the infusion of a mixture of DAPI and rhodamine phalloidin (30 minutes) and a final wash step with 1X PBS. The microinjection protocol provided the ability to load minute volumes of scaffold material, with or without cells, directly in the designated space (supplementary Fig. Scaffold injection into untreated PDMS devices resulted in gels that exuded into the channels and often did not fill the gel cage, resulting in small bubbles adjacent to the micro-pillars. Scaffold injection into untreated PDMS devices resulted in gels that exuded into the channels and often did not fill the gel cage, resulting in small bubbles adjacent to the micro-pillars. Scaffold injection into untreated PDMS devices resulted in gels that exuded into the channels and often did not fill the gel cage, resulting in small bubbles adjacent to the micro-pillars. Subsequent to plasma treatment, hydrophobic recovery time is dependent upon the method of preparation and storage. To maintain the seal when connected to macro-scale plumbing, typical microfluidic devices are permanently bonded or vacuum sealed23 to glass or a layer of PDMS to prevent leaks. We have found that the strength of the bond between PDMS and glass increases over time and have experienced minimal problems with leaks. While the importance of the extracellular microenvironment is clear, the ability to investigate the effects of physiologically relevant biophysical and biochemical factors is restricted in existing 3D cell culture platforms. In this study, 40 kDa dextran (non-reactive solute) was chosen because it is similar in size to several growth factors of interest including VEGF, bFGF and IGF24.The experimental results for gradients under static conditions were compared to results from a finite element (supplementary Fig. Figure 2d shows the comparison between the theoretical results (solid lines) and experimental results for two “gel cage” geometries. This value for diffusivity agrees well with the range of values reported in the literature25, 26. This value for diffusivity agrees well with the range of values reported in the literature25, 26. This value for diffusivity agrees well with the range of values reported in the literature25, 26. With this wide range of stimuli and morphological responses they elicit this serves as a model system to demonstrate the unique capabilities of our μFD. Most are limited in the scope of biochemical or biophysical factors that can be controlled, and often cannot be imaged at high resolution during the course of an experiment. Most are limited in the scope of biochemical or biophysical factors that can be controlled, and often cannot be imaged at high resolution during the course of an experiment. ECs invade 3D matrix to form capillary-like structures reminiscent of sprouting angiogenesisHMVEC-ad were cultured until sub-confluence on a collagen coated flask in EGM-2MV complete media, harvested and subsequently cultured in the μFD. Here the directional sprouting and migration occurs in the microscopic viewing plane. Time–lapse imaging shows a “lead-cell” as it invades the underlying 3D collagen matrix. Subsequent morphological changes included increased penetration depth, filopodial diameter and translocation of cell from monolayer (evident by movement of nucleus) (Fig. ECs maintained in cultured for several days form multi-cellular capillary-like structures. In the presence of interstitial flow (~ 90μm min−1) ECs form multi-cellular structures within the gel and the monolayer at the gel/liquid interface (Fig. In the presence of interstitial flow (~ 90μm min−1) ECs form multi-cellular structures within the gel and the monolayer at the gel/liquid interface (Fig. In the presence of interstitial flow (~ 90μm min−1) ECs form multi-cellular structures within the gel and the monolayer at the gel/liquid interface (Fig. The existence of continuous lumens is further demonstrated by flowing beads through the vessels under a small pressure drop (supplementary movie 3). The main challenge has been to provide a model system that accurately mimics key features of the in vivo microenvironment yet provides means for continuous observation and control. The growth of new blood vessels involves a cascade of events that are a result of molecular, cellular and mechanical interactions in a spatiotemporally controlled environment. The integration of 3D scaffolds and microfluidic networks permits the control of the fluidic environment with the benefit of a more in vivo –like 3D micro-architecture and high-quality imaging capabilities for dynamic studies. We demonstrate the flexibility of this system in three separate EC capillary morphogenesis assays. The capillary-like structures that form in these three assays differ drastically with the most promising and physiologically relevant being the 3D sprouting assay (Fig. The capillary-like structures that form in these three assays differ drastically with the most promising and physiologically relevant being the 3D sprouting assay (Fig. 5), ECs form multi-cellular cords and isolated ring structures, while ECs that predominately migrate in a 2D manner (against hard substrate into a 3D matrix region) form tube and sheet-like structures (Fig. Each of these processes has been extensively studied and shown to be regulated by a wide spectrum of biophysical factors and sequenced biochemical cues. We know of no in vitro angiogenesis models and microfluidic systems which couple microfabricated technology with the basic concepts of traditional 3D in vitro angiogenesis models and that are geared towards promoting and studying capillary morphogenesis in response the relevant biochemical and biophysical features present in vivo. This permits the establishment of gradients in both pressure and chemotactic factors across the gel. In dynamic cultures, the microfluidic chip is connected to an external flow circuit which allows the control of both surface shear stress and interstitial flow perpendicular to a cultured monolayer or past cells suspended in the gel. Briefly, sterilized wafers were placed on trays in plasma cleaner (Harrick, CA) chamber (pattern side up). This is repeated for multiple wafers at a time. Gradient studies were performed under static (no flow) (Fig. 2c) and dynamic (flow through the channels) conditions (detailed in supplementary material) with the media in one microchannel replaced by a dilute solution of fluorescent dextran (40 kDa, Invitrogen) at an initial concentration of 20 μg ml−1. Most are 2D in the sense that the cells are plated on top of a coated substrate. A series of fluorescent images (4× magnification) of the gel region were acquired with a Hamamatsu camera (Hamamatsu, Japan) using Openlab (Improvision, MA) data acquisition software and stored for further analysis. A series of fluorescent images (4× magnification) of the gel region were acquired with a Hamamatsu camera (Hamamatsu, Japan) using Openlab (Improvision, MA) data acquisition software and stored for further analysis. Image processing of time-lapse fluorescent images was performed using a custom written ImageJ (NIH public-domain image processing software) macro and MATLAB (MathWorks, MA) code. Cells maintained in cultures for several days in complete media or media supplemented with bFGF/VEGF/PMA cocktail which were replenished at 24 hour time points. Prior to cell seeding the coating solution was replaced with complete media and equilibrated for another 2 – 4 hours. 