The latter corresponds to an average change of 19 minutes of EMS travel time per day for the entire County. The latter corresponds to an average change of 19 minutes of EMS travel time per day for the entire County. The down triage of lower risk patients to non-referral hospitals also had little impact on daily hospital census in the ICU or ward. We also found that regionalization had only a minor impact on procedural volume at small hospitals. Previous reports of volume-outcome relationships in mechanical ventilation suggest that such small changes in caseload may not impact the odds of death. Previous reports of volume-outcome relationships in mechanical ventilation suggest that such small changes in caseload may not impact the odds of death. In fact, fewer than one in twenty EMS transports increased time by more than 12 minutes. In fact, fewer than one in twenty EMS transports increased time by more than 12 minutes. In fact, fewer than one in twenty EMS transports increased time by more than 12 minutes. In fact, fewer than one in twenty EMS transports increased time by more than 12 minutes. Although studies suggest that prehospital transport intervals are not associated with outcome in trauma or cardiac arrest,(29, 30) it is unknown how modest changes to prehospital transport intervals could independently impact outcomes of the non-trauma critically ill - or whether increases in transport time are specific to certain triage paths (e.g. Although studies suggest that prehospital transport intervals are not associated with outcome in trauma or cardiac arrest,(29, 30) it is unknown how modest changes to prehospital transport intervals could independently impact outcomes of the non-trauma critically ill - or whether increases in transport time are specific to certain triage paths (e.g. This study also demonstrates that additional ICU beds are not required as the critical care system evolves, at least in the US. This study also demonstrates how discrete event simulation can be a valuable tool for health system planning. Our definition of referral centers was empiric and informed by prior studies on volume-outcome relationships in critical care. Finally, we acknowledge that this study focused on the feasibility of regionalization scenarios, and did not address patient-centered outcomes for these system-level changes. Finally, we acknowledge that this study focused on the feasibility of regionalization scenarios, and did not address patient-centered outcomes for these system-level changes. Finally, we acknowledge that this study focused on the feasibility of regionalization scenarios, and did not address patient-centered outcomes for these system-level changes. This simulation study provides important new insight suggesting that selective prehospital triage can feasibly allocate non-trauma, critically ill patients to referral hospitals without compromising ICU census, procedural volume at smaller hospitals, or EMS travel times. Future work should explore these findings through more complex models that incorporate larger regions and the entire trajectory of critical illness. Data sourcesWe used a cohort of all acute care hospitalizations in King County, Washington in 2006. Paramedics trained in advanced life support provide the second tier, responding to selected patients who are more severely ill, based on assessments by both emergency medical dispatchers and first responders. Incident EMS calls were linked at the patient level to 2006 geographic and population data in the US Census, and at the hospital level to the 2006 American Hospital Association Annual Survey (AHA). (17) We defined mechanical ventilation and hemodialysis using validated International Classification of Diseases, version 9—clinical modification procedure codes. (17) We defined mechanical ventilation and hemodialysis using validated International Classification of Diseases, version 9—clinical modification procedure codes. After developing the model we calibrated it against observed data by running it for 365 days (January 1, 2006 to December 31, 2006). During calibration, we modified the model to include a one-month warm-up phase prior to January 1, 2006 so that the model outputs would best approximate the observed data on January 1, 2006. Regionalization scenariosTo evaluate the health system impacts of regionalization we created several rules for prehospital triage. If the nearest hospital was full, the patient was sent to the next nearest hospital.Once admitted to a hospital, we assumed that patients’ treatment, ICU admission status, and outcomes were similar to their baseline hospital. Despite regionalization's potential benefits, key gaps remain in our understanding of how it will impact the delivery of critical care in emergency departments, hospitals, and emergency medical services (EMS) agencies. Second, we simulated both up-triage of EMS patients with risk score ≥ 2 to the nearest referral center and down-triage of patients with score 0 or 1 to the nearest non-referral center (“up and down triage”). Second, we simulated both up-triage of EMS patients with risk score ≥ 2 to the nearest referral center and down-triage of patients with score 0 or 1 to the nearest non-referral center (“up and down triage”). Third, we simulated up and down-triage after reducing the number of ICU beds at each hospital by 25%, considering that King County, Washington has ICU bed availability (37.5 per 100,000 capita) that exceeds most US regions which average 20 to 25 ICU beds per 100,000 capita (“up and down triage with ICU bed reduction”). To analyze procedural volume, we calculated the observed cases of mechanical ventilation and hemodialysis at each hospital. To analyze procedural volume, we calculated the observed cases of mechanical ventilation and hemodialysis at each hospital. We chose mechanical ventilation and hemodialysis to illustrate advanced procedures for which a minimum number may be required for clinical competence. At baseline, adult, non-trauma, non-arrest ground EMS patients accounted for 10.4% (N=20,395) of hospitalizations. (5) These key barriers to feasibility require investigation prior to widespread implementation of a regionalized system of care. (5) These key barriers to feasibility require investigation prior to widespread implementation of a regionalized system of care. Patient destinationsPatient destinations at baseline and after each regionalization scenario are shown in Table 2. Patient destinationsPatient destinations at baseline and after each regionalization scenario are shown in Table 2. Patient destinationsPatient destinations at baseline and after each regionalization scenario are shown in Table 2. Of the 10,242 EMS patients with risk score <2, 30% (N=3,167) were taken to a referral hospital (13% to the nearest and 17% to the non-nearest) and 70% (N=7,705) were taken to a non-referral hospital (46% to the nearest and 23% to the non-nearest).In the up-triage only scenario, all high-risk patients were triaged to a referral hospital. Referral hospital ICU occupancy increased to 68% after up-triage, 64% with up and down triage, and 74% under up and down triage with bed reduction. Referral hospital ICU occupancy increased to 68% after up-triage, 64% with up and down triage, and 74% under up and down triage with bed reduction. Referral hospital ICU occupancy increased to 68% after up-triage, 64% with up and down triage, and 74% under up and down triage with bed reduction. Referral hospital ICU occupancy increased to 68% after up-triage, 64% with up and down triage, and 74% under up and down triage with bed reduction. Referral hospital ICU occupancy increased to 68% after up-triage, 64% with up and down triage, and 74% under up and down triage with bed reduction. 