Lipids with a cylindrical shape, like phosphatidylcholine, PG, and PS, have a head-group cross-sectional area comparable to that of the acyl chains and spontaneously form bilayers. parallel, liposomes were thawed at room temperature and subsequently homogenized by 11 extrusions through a 400-nm polycarbonate filter (Avestin Europe GMBH, Germany). Proteo-liposomes were suspended in 10 mM potassium-phosphate plus 100 mM potassium-acetate (pH 6.0), snap frozen, and stored in liquid nitrogen. Lipids with a cone shape, like phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) and phosphatidic acid, have a head-group cross-sectional area that is smaller than that of the acyl chain area. This results in maximal values of ZΔpH and ΔΨ of −83 mV as calculated according to the Nernst equation, yielding a proton motive force of −166 mV. The initial rates of transport were determined from the slope of progress curves (Figure 1(b)). Lipid extraction and mass spectrometryLipid extraction from the proteo-liposomes was performed based on the Bligh and Dyer method [43]. The lower organic phase was separated from the upper aqueous phase and dried under a nitrogen stream. The column outlet of the LC system (Accela/Surveyor; Thermo) was connected to a heated electrospray ionization source of mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap XL; Thermo) operated in negative mode. The column outlet of the LC system (Accela/Surveyor; Thermo) was connected to a heated electrospray ionization source of mass spectrometer (LTQ Orbitrap XL; Thermo) operated in negative mode. The lateral pressure profile is also affected by the acyl chain length and degree of unsaturation, and charge of the head-groups [14]. The picture that emerges from studies on four different bacterial transporters [23–26] is that anionic lipids can fulfill specific roles in the activity or and regulation of transport activity, and that non-bilayer lipids stimulate transport. In a recent study [31], we have used styrene maleic acid lipid particles to extract proteins and lipids located within a defined diameter of the transmembrane stalk of proteins in the plasma membrane of yeast. Typically, we use a ΔΨ and −ZΔpH of −81 mV each (Z = 58 mV), producing a proton motive force of −162 mV. We used Lyp1-GFP rather than wild-type Lyp1, because the chimera proved more stable during protein purification and membrane reconstitution, and the fluorescent moiety allowed more accurate determination of the Lyp1 concentration. We used Lyp1-GFP rather than wild-type Lyp1, because the chimera proved more stable during protein purification and membrane reconstitution, and the fluorescent moiety allowed more accurate determination of the Lyp1 concentration. Figure 1(b) shows the import of lysine over time, from which the slope estimates the initial rate of transport.In initial experiments with ergosterol present, we observed that C34:1 (C18:1 plus C16:0 acyl chains) palmitoyl-oleoyl-sn-phosphatidylX (POPX; where X = choline, ethanolamine, glycerol, or serine; Figure 2(a) and (b)), support a much higher transport activity than the most commonly used C36:2 forms or when C32:0 dipalmitoyl-sn-phosphatidylX (DPPX; C32:0 = 2 C16:0 chains) lipids were used (Figure 2(c)). Hence, we started with a mixture of 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoserine (POPS), 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoglycerol (POPG), 1palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanola-mine (POPE), and POPC (17.5 mol% each) plus 30 mol% ergosterol (Figure 2(d), #1) and used that to benchmark the activity of Lyp1 in vesicles against the effects of phospholipids and sterols. Increasing the fraction of POPG or lowering of POPC (#4) had no negative effect on transport. We determined the PE dependence of Lyp1 by increasing the fraction of POPE at the expense of POPC (Figure 3(b)). Next, we titrated in DOPE at the expense of POPE to gradually increase the degree of acyl chain unsaturation (Figure 3(d)). We increased the fraction of ergosterol at the expense of POPC and observed an increase in activity up to 10 mol%. However, the two sterols and the mixture thereof, which together represent the functional groups of ergosterol, cannot substitute for ergosterol itself (Figure 4(b)). These biophysical properties coincide with the high tolerance of yeast for a low pH and high concentration of solvents, which allows the organism to survive in adverse environments [40,41]. These biophysical properties coincide with the high tolerance of yeast for a low pH and high concentration of solvents, which allows the organism to survive in adverse environments [40,41]. Cultivation of Pichia pastoris, protein expression, and plasma membrane isolationThe expression of Lyp1 in P. pastoris (SMD1163-Lyp1-TEV-GFP-his10) and its membrane isolation was described previously [32]. Cultivation of Pichia pastoris, protein expression, and plasma membrane isolationThe expression of Lyp1 in P. pastoris (SMD1163-Lyp1-TEV-GFP-his10) and its membrane isolation was described previously [32]. The hydrophilic heads of phosphatidylglycerol (PG) and -serine (PS) lipids form hydrogen bonds with polar amino acids, and salt-bridges can be formed between basic residues on the protein and the lipid phosphate [10]. The hydrophilic heads of phosphatidylglycerol (PG) and -serine (PS) lipids form hydrogen bonds with polar amino acids, and salt-bridges can be formed between basic residues on the protein and the lipid phosphate [10]. Centrifugation was repeated, and the resulting cell pellet was resuspended to OD600 = 200 in cell resuspension buffer with 1 tablet cOmplete Mini EDTA-free™/10 ml. The resulting cell suspension was broken using a cell disrupter (Constant Cell Disruption Systems, USA) by three sequential passes operating at 39 Kpsi, after which 2 mM fresh PMSF was added. Unbroken cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 18,000 RCF for 30 min at 4 °C (Beckman centrifuge J-20-XP, Rotor JA16.250, DE). The supernatant was transferred to 45 TI rotor (Beckman, DE) tubes and membranes were pelleted by ultracentrifugation (Optima XE-90, Beckman, DE) at 186,000 RCF, 90 min at 4 °C. Aliquots of 2 ml were snap frozen using liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C until further use. 