As noted above, the total number of RCTs for these interventions for AUDs remains relatively small. In addition, with regard to CRA and CM interventions, relatively little work has been done to characterize whether the positive intervention effects are actually mediated by the putative mechanisms of action (e.g., increases in alcohol-free reinforcement). As a final point, beyond existing interventions, behavioral economics may also contribute to novel treatments. The goal of this review was to provide a concise overview of the research program applying behavioral economics to understanding AUDs and to draw attention to priorities for further research. Historically, demand was typically measured using operant self-administration paradigms which defined costs as behavioral responses for alcohol or other drugs (e.g., plunger pulls) [10–12]. State-based demandThe preceding studies all used an alcohol purchase task that focused on alcohol demand in a trait-like way (i.e., how much an individual estimated they would consume on a typical drinking occasion). Behavioral theories of choiceThe preceding approaches all characterize the reinforcing value of alcohol by scaling it against a domain-general (nonspecific) unit of cost (i.e., money, effort). Behavioral theories of choiceThe preceding approaches all characterize the reinforcing value of alcohol by scaling it against a domain-general (nonspecific) unit of cost (i.e., money, effort). In contrast, other methods can be used to assess the proportionate value of a commodity in relation to, and even in combination with, multiple other available reinforcers. In contrast, other methods can be used to assess the proportionate value of a commodity in relation to, and even in combination with, multiple other available reinforcers. Second, individual differences in alcohol demand are significantly associated with level of alcohol consumption, severity of alcohol problems, and other clinically-relevant variables. Second, individual differences in alcohol demand are significantly associated with level of alcohol consumption, severity of alcohol problems, and other clinically-relevant variables. Second, individual differences in alcohol demand are significantly associated with level of alcohol consumption, severity of alcohol problems, and other clinically-relevant variables. Second, individual differences in alcohol demand are significantly associated with level of alcohol consumption, severity of alcohol problems, and other clinically-relevant variables. Finally, much of the research studies to date have been conducted on college students and therefore replicating and extending these results to adult community populations and non-college young adults is of high priority moving forward. Although its provenance is different from other forms of behavioral economics that draw on cognitive psychology [6] or game theory [7], this approach has a similarly high emphasis on decision making as a critical determinant of the behavior of an individual, healthy or unhealthy. This is typically assessed using intertemporal choice tasks comprised of dichotomous choices between smaller-immediate and larger-delayed rewards (most commonly, differing monetary amounts). Thus, a prototypic DRD task item, such as $75 today versus $100 in one-week, assesses the extent to which a person is willing to give up a larger reward to receive a smaller one immediately. Although most studies on DRD use hypothetical reward tasks, several studies have found close correspondence between DRD assessments for actual and hypothetical rewards in both healthy [44–46] and addiction samples [47]. Notably, DRD is associated with AUD severity as well as drinking quantity and frequency [20, 52–54, 55*]. Notably, DRD is associated with AUD severity as well as drinking quantity and frequency [20, 52–54, 55*]. Notably, DRD is associated with AUD severity as well as drinking quantity and frequency [20, 52–54, 55*]. Two recent notable studies have utilized unique methods to isolate eight and five dichotomous choices, respectively [69, 70], offering abbreviated fast methods for assessing DRD. Indeed, evidence supports its association with AUDs and its heritability [71–74, 75*]. Much work is needed to characterize genetic influences on DRD and, ultimately, whether DRD mediates the relationship between particular genes and risk for AUDs. Clinical applications of behavioral economics have typically focused on altering the reinforcement contingencies in an individual's life to increase the value of sobriety and the costs of drinking. The longest standing reinforcement-based treatment is the Community Reinforcement Approach (CRA) [81], which attempts to restructure the environmental contingencies in a patient's life so that abstinence becomes more reinforcing than drinking. In this review, we will concisely review the application of behavioral economics to understanding the etiology and treatment of AUDs. Regarding the efficacy of CRA, early trials reported very positive outcomes [81–83] and subsequently positive outcomes have been found in several populations, including challenging groups, such as homeless adults [84] and young adults [85]. Regarding the efficacy of CRA, early trials reported very positive outcomes [81–83] and subsequently positive outcomes have been found in several populations, including challenging groups, such as homeless adults [84] and young adults [85]. Regarding the efficacy of CRA, early trials reported very positive outcomes [81–83] and subsequently positive outcomes have been found in several populations, including challenging groups, such as homeless adults [84] and young adults [85]. Regarding the efficacy of CRA, early trials reported very positive outcomes [81–83] and subsequently positive outcomes have been found in several populations, including challenging groups, such as homeless adults [84] and young adults [85]. Specifically, the CRAFT program offers strategies for changing the home environmental contingencies to positively reinforce not drinking, to not reinforce drinking, and to positively encourage the individual to seek treatment. The SCRAM device is a transdermal alcohol monitor that is used primarily in legal settings for monitoring alcohol use in adjudicated individuals. The SCRAM device is a transdermal alcohol monitor that is used primarily in legal settings for monitoring alcohol use in adjudicated individuals. The SCRAM device is a transdermal alcohol monitor that is used primarily in legal settings for monitoring alcohol use in adjudicated individuals. This device has been shown to correlate very closely with breath alcohol content (.84) [98] and yields good sensitivity at BAC (blood alcohol concentration) ≥ .08 g/dl (88%) without false positives [99]. However, limitations still remain including accurate detection of lower BAC (<.08 g/dl), water accumulation, and signal interference [99]. 