The concept of atypical or malignant chondroblastoma has been controversial; reflecting this controversy, chondroblastoma had been classified as a tumor of intermediate biologic potential in the 4th edition of the World Health Organization classification [3], and it was reclassified as a benign neoplasm in the 5th edition [4]. The uncertainty regarding atypical or malignant chondroblastoma is due in part to the differential diagnostic consideration of chondroblastoma-like osteosarcoma: tumors with chondroblastoma-like histology but with unusual cytologic atypia and/or infiltrative growth were more likely to have been classified as chondroblastoma-like osteosarcoma. The uncertainty regarding atypical or malignant chondroblastoma is due in part to the differential diagnostic consideration of chondroblastoma-like osteosarcoma: tumors with chondroblastoma-like histology but with unusual cytologic atypia and/or infiltrative growth were more likely to have been classified as chondroblastoma-like osteosarcoma. The uncertainty regarding atypical or malignant chondroblastoma is due in part to the differential diagnostic consideration of chondroblastoma-like osteosarcoma: tumors with chondroblastoma-like histology but with unusual cytologic atypia and/or infiltrative growth were more likely to have been classified as chondroblastoma-like osteosarcoma. The uncertainty regarding atypical or malignant chondroblastoma is due in part to the differential diagnostic consideration of chondroblastoma-like osteosarcoma: tumors with chondroblastoma-like histology but with unusual cytologic atypia and/or infiltrative growth were more likely to have been classified as chondroblastoma-like osteosarcoma. The uncertainty regarding atypical or malignant chondroblastoma is due in part to the differential diagnostic consideration of chondroblastoma-like osteosarcoma: tumors with chondroblastoma-like histology but with unusual cytologic atypia and/or infiltrative growth were more likely to have been classified as chondroblastoma-like osteosarcoma. Case selectionThe archives of Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Massachusetts General Hospital, and Stanford Hospital were searched for cases containing “chondroblastoma-like osteosarcoma” in the diagnostic top line or report text, as well as cases containing “chondroblastoma” along with terms “atypical,” “malignant” or “metastatic.” Two cases were published previously [8, 9]. The imaging findings in malignant chondroblastoma and chondroblastoma-like osteosarcoma substantially overlapped. Lastly, one chondroblastoma-like osteosarcoma in our series showed focal cartilage production, raising the consideration of clear cell chondrosarcoma. Lastly, one chondroblastoma-like osteosarcoma in our series showed focal cartilage production, raising the consideration of clear cell chondrosarcoma. These findings suggest that, among tumors with malignant features, the mitotic rate might be a predictor of more aggressive behavior. This study was approved by the institutional review boards of the authors’ institutions.Sixteen candidate cases were found; hematoxylin and eosin-stained slides and immunohistochemistry (IHC) were re-reviewed concurrently by four co-authors (JLH, GPN, YPH and DJP). Two patients died of disease, one due to local recurrence in the C7 vertebra and one due to widespread metastases over a 26-year period of time. Two patients died of disease, one due to local recurrence in the C7 vertebra and one due to widespread metastases over a 26-year period of time. Two patients died of disease, one due to local recurrence in the C7 vertebra and one due to widespread metastases over a 26-year period of time. To our knowledge, there are no convincing reports of H3K36M in tumors other than chondroblastoma, including the over 1 million tumors in the Catalogue of Somatic Mutations in Cancer (COSMIC) database [18]. One had no additional mutations; the other had a nonsense SETD2 K1937* mutation and copy number gains and losses on chromosomes 9 and 10. More work is needed to determine whether histone H3 methylation abnormalities are a recurrent feature of chondroblastoma-like osteosarcoma. More work is needed to determine whether histone H3 methylation abnormalities are a recurrent feature of chondroblastoma-like osteosarcoma. Immunohistochemistry and molecular studies were used to support diagnoses when available.Imaging studies were reviewed by a musculoskeletal radiologist (MAB). Radiographs were available for eight patients, CT for six patients, and MRI for four patients. A whole-body PET/CT was available for one patient. A whole-body PET/CT was available for one patient. Integrated case review with clinicopathologic featuresUpon re-review, 7 of 11 tumors were classified as malignant chondroblastoma and 4 of 11 were classified as chondroblastoma-like osteosarcoma (Table 1). Malignant chondroblastomas manifested as expansile, lytic lesions on radiographs and CT with thin sclerotic margins, with or without areas of cortical break, and scattered internal trabeculations (Fig. Malignant chondroblastomas manifested as expansile, lytic lesions on radiographs and CT with thin sclerotic margins, with or without areas of cortical break, and scattered internal trabeculations (Fig. Malignant chondroblastomas manifested as expansile, lytic lesions on radiographs and CT with thin sclerotic margins, with or without areas of cortical break, and scattered internal trabeculations (Fig. The existence of atypical or malignant chondroblastoma has been controversial, and chondroblastoma has been re-classified from a tumor of intermediate biologic potential in the 4th edition of the World Health Organization classification to a benign neoplasm in the 5th edition [3, 4]. Tumor recurrence demonstrated lytic expansile lesions with cortical destruction and associated soft tissue mass. Body sites for primary tumors were ribs (3 tumors), scapula (2), talus (1), and radius (1). Body sites for primary tumors were ribs (3 tumors), scapula (2), talus (1), and radius (1). Body sites for primary tumors were ribs (3 tumors), scapula (2), talus (1), and radius (1). Two patients received adjuvant chemotherapy; neither experienced recurrence or metastasis. Two patients received adjuvant chemotherapy; neither experienced recurrence or metastasis. One patient with a rib primary (case 1) who developed recurrence also developed femur, hip soft tissue, scalp, chin, and cerebellar metastases over a 26-year period (Fig. In contrast to chondroblastoma-like osteosarcoma, no tumors exhibited bone production by cytologically malignant cells.IHC was positive for H3K36M in 6 of 7 cases (Figs. In contrast to chondroblastoma-like osteosarcoma, no tumors exhibited bone production by cytologically malignant cells.IHC was positive for H3K36M in 6 of 7 cases (Figs. Case 4 had the H3F3B K36M missense mutation (35% allele fraction) and additionally was found to harbor SETD2 K1937* nonsense mutation (26% allele fraction) and copy number gains and losses in chromosomes 9 and 10. Two occurred in males and two occurred in females, with a median age at presentation of 21 years (range: 19–40 years). The second patient who died of disease had a scapular primary tumor and developed widespread metastases including metastases to the lungs (interval after initial diagnosis: 4, 8, and 13 years), distal humerus (23 years), skull (24 years), and brain (25 years).The chondroblastoma-like osteosarcomas were found on consensus review to contain regions of cytologically malignant cells producing bone, distinguishing them from malignant chondroblastoma. All four tumors exhibited more striking cytologic atypia than the malignant chondroblastomas. 