Acute aortic dissection is relatively uncommon condition and could represent a challenge due to its varying initial clinical presentations with symptoms and signs that overlap with other entities, while at the same time it is crucial to make a prompt diagnose and management [2]. Abrupt onset chest pain is the most common presenting symptoms and mostly describes as sharp, tearing, ripping and excruciating with the maximum severity at the time of onset [1]. Most of the aortic dissection with painless presentation has normal electrocardiogram (ECG) [7], but different types of arrhythmias such as atrioventricular block, atrial fibrillation, supraventricular tachycardia, ventricular bigeminy and even complete heart block has been reported [2]. Treatment for ascending aorta and aortic arch aneurysms could be challenging and progression to more severe complications like acute aortic dissection and aortic rupture are common [9]. We should consider patient’s underlying disease such as hypertension, or atherosclerosis, and history of collagen diseases such as Marfan syndrome and Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, bicuspid aortic valve, aortic coarctation, and Turner syndrome, also Iatrogenic causes of aortic dissection include cardiac catheterization, angioplasty, or cardiac surgery could be the precipitating factior1. In this case patients’ initial symptom was dyspnea started twelve hours prior to presentation, so a physician must always suspect aortic dissection because atypical presentations can be the case, and also aortic dissection could be accompanied by ACS. These findings may happen in about forty percent of patients with proximal aortic dissection [14]. In this case, we provided intravascular nitroglycerin to lowers preload and therefore reduces wall stress, resulting in a decrease in myocardial oxygen demand, decreased chest pain and blood pressure. ECG cannot be used as a diagnostic tool for aortic dissection, that is because nearly thirty one percent of aortic dissection could present with normal ECG. However, an ECG must be performed on all patients with chest pain for the differential diagnosis of acute myocardial infarction of aortic dissection, and to diagnose possible combined aortic dissection and myocardial infarction [1,15]. In this report, we emphasize the importance of clinical suspicion of aortic dissection, patient could present in the emergency department, or even to the outpatient clinics, with various kinds of presenting symptoms as we explained. The clinical key is that always be aware of aortic dissection even though the patient presents only with chest pain that might be similar to chest pain of ACS. 45-year-old obese man with hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellites and coronary artery disease presented to the emergency department with complain of shortness of breath started about 12 hours before presentation. 