All the cells recorded in the three groups, Dlx5/6-eGFP, Nkx2-1 GOF and Nkx2-1/Dlx2 GOF displayed age-appropriate resting membrane potential (-63.73±1.73) and exhibited intrinsic firing properties consistent with native cINs originating from MGE or CGE (Figure 5).Specifically, when recording the Dlx5/6-eGFP transplanted cells (n=3) we identified two non-fast spiking interneurons and one that possessed CGE-derived character, which we have previously described as a sigmoid bursting cell (sIB) (Miyoshi et al , 2010). These results indicate that the transplanted cells undergo the normal time course for passive and active intrinsic membrane property development. These results indicate that the transplanted cells undergo the normal time course for passive and active intrinsic membrane property development. In keeping with the in vitro differentiation results, Dlx5/6-eGFP proved to be a reliable predictor of tangential migration into the neocortex as the Nkx2-1/Dlx2/Lmo3 GOF line had approximately 50% more cells in the cortex than Nkx2-1/Dlx2 gain-of-function alone (Figure 7B). By contrast, in Lmo3 null animals the total number of Pv+ cINs was significantly reduced and there was a slight increase in SST+ cINs (Figure 7C and D). Neither the overall number of MGE type cINs or the their layer distribution was significantly altered in mutants (Figure 7D and Figure S12A–C). The 1:1 ratio of PV:SST was also observed in all layers (Figure S12D and E). In fact, they were produced with specific enough fidelity that they integrated and established appropriate afferent connectivity upon transplantation (Eiraku et al , 2008; Gaspard et al , 2008). In fact, they were produced with specific enough fidelity that they integrated and established appropriate afferent connectivity upon transplantation (Eiraku et al , 2008; Gaspard et al , 2008). Indeed, in non-neural structures Nkx2.1 is essential for both lung and thyroid development (Kimura et al , 1996; Minoo et al , 1999). Indeed, in non-neural structures Nkx2.1 is essential for both lung and thyroid development (Kimura et al , 1996; Minoo et al , 1999). Indeed, in non-neural structures Nkx2.1 is essential for both lung and thyroid development (Kimura et al , 1996; Minoo et al , 1999). Indeed, in non-neural structures Nkx2.1 is essential for both lung and thyroid development (Kimura et al , 1996; Minoo et al , 1999). Consistent with this idea, we observed a near doubling of the number of Dlx5/6-eGFP+ neurons when both pathways were engaged. Consistent with this idea, we observed a near doubling of the number of Dlx5/6-eGFP+ neurons when both pathways were engaged. Consistent with this idea, we observed a near doubling of the number of Dlx5/6-eGFP+ neurons when both pathways were engaged. It also resulted in an approximate doubling in the number of ES-derived cINs found in the cortex at P21. It also resulted in an approximate doubling in the number of ES-derived cINs found in the cortex at P21. It also resulted in an approximate doubling in the number of ES-derived cINs found in the cortex at P21. The observation that co-recruitment of Nkx2-1 and Dlx2 greatly enhances the induction of cortical interneurons demonstrates that the directed differentiation of ES cells can be enhanced by the appropriate use of genes known to play a role in cIN differentiation. This allowed us to test 12 genes unknown for their potential role in cIN in vitro differentiation. This allowed us to test 12 genes unknown for their potential role in cIN in vitro differentiation. Our subsequent analysis of the Lmo3 null animal revealed a significant reduction in Pv+ cINs and an increase in SST+ cINs without significantly affecting the overall number of MGE type cINs. This is consistent with our findings that Lhx6 in situ was normal in e15.5 cortex (Figure S14) and layer distribution postnatally for Pv+ and SST+ cINs was normal in Lmo3 null mice (Figure S12B–E). It is interesting to note, however, that Pou3f4 has been reported to augment differentiation towards neural stem cells and dopaminergic neurons, and might therefore act generally to enhance in vitro neural differentiation in the presence of other instructive intrinsic cues (Han et al , 2012; Tan et al , 2011). As such, our development of a high-throughput approach for examining the function of candidate factors provides a robust method for identifying such factors. As such, our development of a high-throughput approach for examining the function of candidate factors provides a robust method for identifying such factors. As such, our development of a high-throughput approach for examining the function of candidate factors provides a robust method for identifying such factors. As such, our development of a high-throughput approach for examining the function of candidate factors provides a robust method for identifying such factors. Old SFEB medium was removed and 800 μl of new SFEB containing Dkk-1 and SHH N-terminus (R&D Systems; 5mM) was added. Medium was changed similarly every 3 days until day 11, at which point embryoid bodies were dissociated for subsequent experiments. Cells were maintained the in the same SFEB medium as floating embryoid cultures, with medium changed at the same intervals. Cells were maintained the in the same SFEB medium as floating embryoid cultures, with medium changed at the same intervals. Cultures were fixed at day 11 for immunocytochemistry.For neuronal monolayer cultures, day 11 EBs were gently and completely dissociated with Accutase (15 minutes, 37°C followed by gentle trituration with P200 tip 10-15x) and plated at 200 000 cells/cm2 on poly-L-lysine/laminin and maintained in Neurobasal + B27 medium. Cell transplantationA detailed description of ultrasound backscatter-guided transplantation has been described previously (Liu et al , 1998; Nery et al , 2002; Wichterle et al , 1999; Wichterle et al , 2001). Cell transplantationA detailed description of ultrasound backscatter-guided transplantation has been described previously (Liu et al , 1998; Nery et al , 2002; Wichterle et al , 1999; Wichterle et al , 2001). Cell transplantationA detailed description of ultrasound backscatter-guided transplantation has been described previously (Liu et al , 1998; Nery et al , 2002; Wichterle et al , 1999; Wichterle et al , 2001). Cell transplantationA detailed description of ultrasound backscatter-guided transplantation has been described previously (Liu et al , 1998; Nery et al , 2002; Wichterle et al , 1999; Wichterle et al , 2001). Briefly, day 9 EBs were gently dissociated with Accutase (15 minutes, 37°C followed by gentle trituration with a P200 tip) and then incubated with adeno-associated virus encoding CAG-eGFP for 3 hours in suspension. Following surgery, the uterus was carefully replaced and the dam was sewn up, allowing host pups to be birthed normally. At postnatal day 21, host animals were anesthetized and transcardially perfused in preparation for immunohistochemical analysis. Either constitutive or conditional removal of Nkx2-1 from the MGE results in a trans-fating of cortical interneurons produced from this structure to a CGE identity. ES cell derived cortical interneurons exhibit properties of in vivo cINsCortical interneuron progenitors engrafted in utero into their site of origin exhibit a specialized migratory behavior into the neocortex (Butt et al , 2005; Nery et al , 2002; Wichterle et al , 2001). It also indicates that our in vivo transplantation approach provides a stringent test for the production of bona fide ES-derived cortical interneurons.Work by the group of Yoshiki Sasai has demonstrated that mouse ES cells can be directed towards a telencephalic progenitor fate through early suppression of Wnt signaling (Watanabe et al , 2005). As a means to track the cells we generated a pan-eGFP expressing ES cell line by recombining out the stop cassettes from the RCE dual ES cell line, used previously to generate the RCE dual reporter mouse; hereafter referred to as the RCE line. As a means to track the cells we generated a pan-eGFP expressing ES cell line by recombining out the stop cassettes from the RCE dual ES cell line, used previously to generate the RCE dual reporter mouse; hereafter referred to as the RCE line. As a means to track the cells we generated a pan-eGFP expressing ES cell line by recombining out the stop cassettes from the RCE dual ES cell line, used previously to generate the RCE dual reporter mouse; hereafter referred to as the RCE line. As a means to track the cells we generated a pan-eGFP expressing ES cell line by recombining out the stop cassettes from the RCE dual ES cell line, used previously to generate the RCE dual reporter mouse; hereafter referred to as the RCE line. (Miyoshi et al , 2010; Sousa et al , 2009). (Miyoshi et al , 2010; Sousa et al , 2009). (Miyoshi et al , 2010; Sousa et al , 2009). RCE ES cells were differentiated as previously described (Watanabe et al , 2005) to generate ventral telencephalic progenitors (Figure 1A–C), a large proportion of which (approximately 50%) differentiated into GABAergic neurons (Figure 1D). Establishing an ES cell reporter line for cortical interneuron differentiationUsing these previously established methods as a starting point, it is clear that, contrary to unspecified neural stem cells, at least a small proportion can be differentiated into cortical interneuron progenitors by exposure to appropriate extrinsic signaling factors - progenitors that demonstrate appropriate migratory behavior and exhibit mature cIN phenotypes. Their involvement in various brain activities and disease states is not altogether surprising when one considers that as a group cINs are highly heterogeneous by a number of measures: including morphology, marker expression, and intrinsic electrophysiology, which are themselves a reflection of the diverse ways that they can impact neural function (Ascoli et al , 2008; Kawaguchi and Kondo, 2002). At e16.5, founder analysis was performed to identify clones with appropriate and robust eGFP expression that strongly resembled wild type Dlx5/6-expression (Figure S1A–E). At e16.5, founder analysis was performed to identify clones with appropriate and robust eGFP expression that strongly resembled wild type Dlx5/6-expression (Figure S1A–E). Having identified a reliable reporter, we differentiated the reporter ES cell line (referred hereafter as: Dlx5/6-eGFP) and dissociated the resultant EBs to generate a neuronal monolayer. Having identified a reliable reporter, we differentiated the reporter ES cell line (referred hereafter as: Dlx5/6-eGFP) and dissociated the resultant EBs to generate a neuronal monolayer. Having identified a reliable reporter, we differentiated the reporter ES cell line (referred hereafter as: Dlx5/6-eGFP) and dissociated the resultant EBs to generate a neuronal monolayer. Having identified a reliable reporter, we differentiated the reporter ES cell line (referred hereafter as: Dlx5/6-eGFP) and dissociated the resultant EBs to generate a neuronal monolayer. Having identified a reliable reporter, we differentiated the reporter ES cell line (referred hereafter as: Dlx5/6-eGFP) and dissociated the resultant EBs to generate a neuronal monolayer. Indeed, when Shh was excluded from our culture conditions eGFP+ neurons were completely absent upon differentiation of the Dlx5/6-eGFP line (Figure S3). Indeed, when Shh was excluded from our culture conditions eGFP+ neurons were completely absent upon differentiation of the Dlx5/6-eGFP line (Figure S3). To mimic this genetic cascade, we included a tetracycline transactivator element (tTA2s) to be co-expressed along with Nkx2-1 (Urlinger et al , 2000). To mimic this genetic cascade, we included a tetracycline transactivator element (tTA2s) to be co-expressed along with Nkx2-1 (Urlinger et al , 2000). While tTA2s transcription expires with the extinction of the Nestin enhancer, our hope was that the initial induction of Dlx2 would be sufficient to initiate the normal differentiation cascade seen in cINs.To test this transcriptional specification strategy, we generated two transgenic ES cell lines using the Dlx5/6-eGFP reporter line as a starting point. With the former, a long list of candidate genes is produced, with only limited means to identify which merit follow-up analysis. Dlx5/6-eGFP expression was further augmented by Dlx2 gain-of-function, nearly doubling Dlx5/6-eGFP expression when compared with Nkx2-1 alone. Dlx5/6-eGFP expression was further augmented by Dlx2 gain-of-function, nearly doubling Dlx5/6-eGFP expression when compared with Nkx2-1 alone. Dlx5/6-eGFP expression was further augmented by Dlx2 gain-of-function, nearly doubling Dlx5/6-eGFP expression when compared with Nkx2-1 alone. There was, however, a significant enhancement in the total number of cINs present in the cortex with Nkx2-1 GOF, an effect that mirrored the increase in Dlx5/6-eGFP+ neurons when the lines were differentiated in vivo. This effect was even greater with the addition of Dlx2 (Nkx2-1/Dlx2 GOF) where we observed a further increase in the number of cINs that reached the cortex (Figure 4G). 