In high-fertility populations with endemic parasitism, helminth infections frequently coincide with pregnancy, a cooccurrence that may have been the norm rather than the exception throughout much of human history. In high-fertility populations with endemic parasitism, helminth infections frequently coincide with pregnancy, a cooccurrence that may have been the norm rather than the exception throughout much of human history. In high-fertility populations with endemic parasitism, helminth infections frequently coincide with pregnancy, a cooccurrence that may have been the norm rather than the exception throughout much of human history. In high-fertility populations with endemic parasitism, helminth infections frequently coincide with pregnancy, a cooccurrence that may have been the norm rather than the exception throughout much of human history. In high-fertility populations with endemic parasitism, helminth infections frequently coincide with pregnancy, a cooccurrence that may have been the norm rather than the exception throughout much of human history. Models 5 and 6 tested hookworm infection’s association with different reproductive states. Models 5 and 6 tested hookworm infection’s association with different reproductive states. Models 5 and 6 tested hookworm infection’s association with different reproductive states. Models 3 and 4 included only the 1008 observations for which ESR values were available. Models 3 and 4 included only the 1008 observations for which ESR values were available. These models produced similar results, with new hookworm infections leading to an increase in eosinophils, new pregnancies in a decrease, and the transition from pregnant to lactating being associated with an overall increase in eosinophils.As a further check on the results from the eosinophil models, we ran identical models for neutrophils and lymphocytes, cell types which play a less prominent role in the response to hookworm infection (Table S6). These models produced similar results, with new hookworm infections leading to an increase in eosinophils, new pregnancies in a decrease, and the transition from pregnant to lactating being associated with an overall increase in eosinophils.As a further check on the results from the eosinophil models, we ran identical models for neutrophils and lymphocytes, cell types which play a less prominent role in the response to hookworm infection (Table S6). These models produced similar results, with new hookworm infections leading to an increase in eosinophils, new pregnancies in a decrease, and the transition from pregnant to lactating being associated with an overall increase in eosinophils.As a further check on the results from the eosinophil models, we ran identical models for neutrophils and lymphocytes, cell types which play a less prominent role in the response to hookworm infection (Table S6). These models produced similar results, with new hookworm infections leading to an increase in eosinophils, new pregnancies in a decrease, and the transition from pregnant to lactating being associated with an overall increase in eosinophils.As a further check on the results from the eosinophil models, we ran identical models for neutrophils and lymphocytes, cell types which play a less prominent role in the response to hookworm infection (Table S6). If increases in hookworm-positive fecal smears are observed among pregnant women, these increases are likely due to new infection events during pregnancy, since time from initial infection to onset of egg production is 5 to 9 weeks (Cline et al , 1984). If increases in hookworm-positive fecal smears are observed among pregnant women, these increases are likely due to new infection events during pregnancy, since time from initial infection to onset of egg production is 5 to 9 weeks (Cline et al , 1984). Eosinophils attack hookworm larvae as they invade host tissues, preventing them from successfully attaching to the host’s intestinal wall, where they mature into egg-laying adults (McSorley & Loukas, 2010). Eosinophils attack hookworm larvae as they invade host tissues, preventing them from successfully attaching to the host’s intestinal wall, where they mature into egg-laying adults (McSorley & Loukas, 2010). 4.2 |Fetal tolerance and the maternal immune response to hookwormChanges in eosinophil count, or reactivity, to helminth infection during pregnancy could present a mechanism of fetal tolerance with measurable systemic changes. It follows that systemic immunological changes during pregnancy may render pregnant women more susceptible to new hookworm infections or to greater morbidity from existing infections.Eosinophils may be dampened during pregnancy because the cost of lowering protection against hookworm infection is outweighed by the danger of harming the fetus with “friendly fire” from the maternal immune system. This additional cost to maternal resources in the first trimester may have long-term developmental costs for offspring, as well as immediate costs to maternal well-being. Individual costs will of course vary based on infection intensity; hookworm-mediated hemoglobin loss is negatively correlated with worm burden (Hotez et al , 2004) and an infection with a low worm count may not have a biologically meaningful effect on host hemoglobin.The postpartum period, like pregnancy, is characterized by dynamic physiological shifts, including decreasing plasma levels and concomitant increase in hemoglobin concentration. Individual costs will of course vary based on infection intensity; hookworm-mediated hemoglobin loss is negatively correlated with worm burden (Hotez et al , 2004) and an infection with a low worm count may not have a biologically meaningful effect on host hemoglobin.The postpartum period, like pregnancy, is characterized by dynamic physiological shifts, including decreasing plasma levels and concomitant increase in hemoglobin concentration. Individual costs will of course vary based on infection intensity; hookworm-mediated hemoglobin loss is negatively correlated with worm burden (Hotez et al , 2004) and an infection with a low worm count may not have a biologically meaningful effect on host hemoglobin.The postpartum period, like pregnancy, is characterized by dynamic physiological shifts, including decreasing plasma levels and concomitant increase in hemoglobin concentration. Individual costs will of course vary based on infection intensity; hookworm-mediated hemoglobin loss is negatively correlated with worm burden (Hotez et al , 2004) and an infection with a low worm count may not have a biologically meaningful effect on host hemoglobin.The postpartum period, like pregnancy, is characterized by dynamic physiological shifts, including decreasing plasma levels and concomitant increase in hemoglobin concentration. Many of the same immune responses that respond to helminths, such as eosinophils and IgE, are also activated in allergic responses. 4.5 |Limitations of current studyThe use of secondary data for these analyses creates several limitations. However, explicit data on lactation were not collected in this study. Though inexact, parasite load is often indirectly assessed through fecal egg counts, which were not reliably available for this study; we instead relied on a binary presence/absence of eggs or larvae. Helminths also cause systemic shifts toward antibody-mediated type 2 helper T cell (TH2) responses (Blackwell, 2016; Geiger et al , 2002; Jiang et al , 2014; Maizels & Yazdanbakhsh, 2003), which may lead to decreases in inflammatory responses and affect susceptibility to other diseases. Helminths also cause systemic shifts toward antibody-mediated type 2 helper T cell (TH2) responses (Blackwell, 2016; Geiger et al , 2002; Jiang et al , 2014; Maizels & Yazdanbakhsh, 2003), which may lead to decreases in inflammatory responses and affect susceptibility to other diseases. Helminths also cause systemic shifts toward antibody-mediated type 2 helper T cell (TH2) responses (Blackwell, 2016; Geiger et al , 2002; Jiang et al , 2014; Maizels & Yazdanbakhsh, 2003), which may lead to decreases in inflammatory responses and affect susceptibility to other diseases. Helminths also cause systemic shifts toward antibody-mediated type 2 helper T cell (TH2) responses (Blackwell, 2016; Geiger et al , 2002; Jiang et al , 2014; Maizels & Yazdanbakhsh, 2003), which may lead to decreases in inflammatory responses and affect susceptibility to other diseases. Additionally, as we were limited to only a single fecal sample per clinic visit from study participants, our analysis likely includes some false negative diagnoses. The possible trade-off between MBP from placental cells and MBP from eosinophils in a context of helminth infection is an intriguing area for future study. However, existing chronic infections do not appear to have greater physiological costs beyond the first trimester, though the long-term developmental implications of lower maternal hemoglobin in the first trimester are unknown. The role of the immune system is to identify and eliminate any nonself antigens it encounters, yet the maternal immune system tolerates a growing fetus for 9 months, despite the fetus’ paternally derived DNA. Consequently, the clinical hemoglobin threshold for diagnosing anemia is lowered from 12 to 11 g/dL to accommodate the hemoglobin nadir near the end of the second trimester. In Industrialized populations Overall WBC count also rises, due to a marked increase in circulating neutrophils, a major part of the innate inflammatory response (Kaur et al , 2014). Hookworm infection is a common cause of anemia, a deficiency in functional red blood cells that leads to poor tissue oxygenation and subsequent symptoms such as fatigue, particularly among reproductive-aged women (Aphijirawat et al , 2011). The Tsimane are a population of ~16 000 Amerindian forager-horticulturalists who inhabit over 90 villages in the Maniqui River basin in the Beni department of Amazonian Bolivia (Gurven et al , 2017). The Tsimane are a population of ~16 000 Amerindian forager-horticulturalists who inhabit over 90 villages in the Maniqui River basin in the Beni department of Amazonian Bolivia (Gurven et al , 2017). The Tsimane are a population of ~16 000 Amerindian forager-horticulturalists who inhabit over 90 villages in the Maniqui River basin in the Beni department of Amazonian Bolivia (Gurven et al , 2017). The Tsimane are a population of ~16 000 Amerindian forager-horticulturalists who inhabit over 90 villages in the Maniqui River basin in the Beni department of Amazonian Bolivia (Gurven et al , 2017). The Tsimane are a population of ~16 000 Amerindian forager-horticulturalists who inhabit over 90 villages in the Maniqui River basin in the Beni department of Amazonian Bolivia (Gurven et al , 2017). The Tsimane health environment differs from industrialized contexts by its high pathogen burden, including endemic hookworm, energetic limitations, and high fertility (Blackwell, Trumble, Suarez, Stieglitz, et al , 2016; Costa, Trumble, Kaplan, & Gurven, 2018). Roughly a third of Tsimane adults are anemic by WHO standards (Vasunilashorn et al , 2010). Roughly a third of Tsimane adults are anemic by WHO standards (Vasunilashorn et al , 2010). Roughly a third of Tsimane adults are anemic by WHO standards (Vasunilashorn et al , 2010). 2.2 |Data collectionMixed cross-sectional and longitudinal data were collected between 2005 and 2014 by the on-going Tsimane Health and Life History Project (THLHP) (Gurven et al , 2017). Data collection followed the standard THLHP protocol (explained in detail in Blackwell et al , 2011; Blackwell, Tamayo, Beheim, Trumble, Stieglitz, et al , 2015; Martin, Blackwell, Gurven, & Kaplan, 2013; Blackwell, Trumble, Suarez, Beheim, et al , 2016; Gurven, Trumble, et al , 2016). Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) as a marker of generalized inflammation (Erikssen et al , 2000) was calculated using the Westergren (1957) method. Each fecal sample was analyzed by direct identification on wet mounts or by a modified Percoll method (see Blackwell et al , 2011; Blackwell, Martin, Kaplan, & Gurven, 2013) for the presence of helminth eggs, larvae, protozoa, and other parasites. Hookworm and pregnancy might interact not only through exacerbated anemia, but also because both pregnancy and hookworm-infection affect systemic immune responses. For clinic visits with associated parasite data, mean levels of hemoglobin, WBC count, and reproductive state did not differ from clinic visits without parasite data (n = 2470). Informed consent was obtained at both the community and individual participant levels. 