Given the intermittent nature of asthma, participants might have started to have asthma symptoms and to obtain treatment before the baseline examination but had not yet received a physician’s diagnosis at that time. These subjects would likely get diagnosed during the follow-up and be misclassified as having LOA. A stronger signal was most likely achieved by decreasing heterogeneity in the phenotype, but this would need to be replicated in a dataset with better information on these comorbidities. For the present analysis, LOA cases were defined as those who reported never having had an asthma diagnosis at the time of recruitment and who reported an asthma diagnosis for the first time during follow-up. For the present analysis, LOA cases were defined as those who reported never having had an asthma diagnosis at the time of recruitment and who reported an asthma diagnosis for the first time during follow-up. Control subjects were those who never reported an asthma diagnosis during any examination.Data from MESA were used to investigate the top SNPs and genes identified in WHI. Outliers were identified after 5 iterations and were excluded from subsequent analysis.QC procedures for WHI and MESA are presented in eTable 1. Outliers were identified after 5 iterations and were excluded from subsequent analysis.QC procedures for WHI and MESA are presented in eTable 1. Weight status was ascertained by body mass index (BMI; kilograms per meter squared), which was calculated from objective height and weight measurements. Weight status was ascertained by body mass index (BMI; kilograms per meter squared), which was calculated from objective height and weight measurements. Asthma has a strong genetic component, and genomewide association studies (GWASs) have successfully identified more than 100 asthma genes and loci and shed light on the underlying disease mechanisms.9 However, most studies have focused solely on those with early-onset asthma or grouped together those with early-onset asthma and those with LOA. Quantile-quantile plots based on P values from the genomewide association analysis in WHI are shown in eFigure 2. The logistic regression model was adjusted for age, weight status (normal weight, overweight, or obese), dichotomously coded ever-smoking status, and first PC. The logistic regression model was adjusted for age, weight status (normal weight, overweight, or obese), dichotomously coded ever-smoking status, and first PC. The logistic regression model was adjusted for age, weight status (normal weight, overweight, or obese), dichotomously coded ever-smoking status, and first PC. The logistic regression model was adjusted for age, weight status (normal weight, overweight, or obese), dichotomously coded ever-smoking status, and first PC. Then, the 6 SNPs that were genomewide suggestive were tested in MESA, adjusting for the same covariates plus sex.The Versatile Gene-Based Association Study (VEGAS) algorithm was applied to assign variants to genes and conduct gene-based analysis for WHI and MESA, respectively.15 The VEGAS algorithm used all GWAS SNPs as input and assigned them to each gene according to positions on the UCSC Genome Browser hg18 assembly. LOA genetics has been largely understudied, and the mechanisms underlying LOA are not clear.8 Recently, the association between asthma and variants near the HLA complex group 22 gene (HCG22) has been shown to increase with older age of onset in a Japanese population.10 This suggests that the genetic contribution to asthma might differ according to age of onset. However, mean BMI, smoking prevalence, and weight status were significantly associated with LOA status in WHI. These results are consistent with those of previous studies showing smoking and obesity as risk factors for LOA.17 No SNP was significantly associated with LOA based on a Bonferroni-corrected P value of 5.78 × 10−8. Then, a genomewide association analysis was performed in MESA, adjusting for the same covariates as in WHI plus sex. Then, a genomewide association analysis was performed in MESA, adjusting for the same covariates as in WHI plus sex. Then, a genomewide association analysis was performed in MESA, adjusting for the same covariates as in WHI plus sex. Quantile-quantile plots based on P values from the genomewide association analysis in MESA are shown in eFigure 3. However, no SNPs reached a P value less than .05 (Table 3). However, no SNPs reached a P value less than .05 (Table 3). A plot for this region made in LocusZoom is shown in Figure 2.18 The SNP with the lowest P value within each gene was reported by the VEGAS algorithm. Furthermore, we performed gene-based analyses and identified a genomewide significant gene, ZNF248, that was associated with LOA in WHI and MESA. Furthermore, we performed gene-based analyses and identified a genomewide significant gene, ZNF248, that was associated with LOA in WHI and MESA. Furthermore, we performed gene-based analyses and identified a genomewide significant gene, ZNF248, that was associated with LOA in WHI and MESA. The Women’s Health Initiative (WHI) observational cohort and the Multi-Ethnic Study of Atherosclerosis (MESA) were used to identify subjects with LOA. Moreover, to elucidate whether the ZNF248 association is specific to LOA, we conducted a post hoc gene-based analysis for ZNF248 and non-LOA in WHI and MESA. Moreover, to elucidate whether the ZNF248 association is specific to LOA, we conducted a post hoc gene-based analysis for ZNF248 and non-LOA in WHI and MESA. 