However, this study did not account for competing risks, which could bias the risk of recurrent falls associated with deintensification.Observational Studies Comparing Antihypertensive ClassesTwo recent observational studies assessed the effects of individual antihypertensive classes on harm. Overall, RCTs support more intensive BP control to achieve CV and non-CV benefits in ambulatory, healthier older adults, but these trials do not represent the NH population, especially those with history of stroke. Overall, the observational studies in this review have included relevant outcomes but are subject to biases from residual confounding and measurement error (e.g. Also, many of these studies assume that outcomes are consistent regardless of the type of antihypertensive deprescribed, which is unlikely given that antihypertensives are used for various other CV and renal indications. Notably, no antihypertensive deprescribing studies used an active comparator (i.e., deprescribing of another class of drugs not expected to affect the outcome of interest) and negative outcome control to help reduce bias, such as increased surveillance for medication-related problems or confounding by indication [38,39]. Additional RCTs and rigorous observational studies examining effects of de-intensified BP management on patient-centered outcomes in complex, older populations that address the limitations described in this article are needed to inform improved guidelines and treatment for NH residents. Optimal treatment targets and medication management of hypertension in NH residents have not been well addressed in clinical practice guidelines and research. Optimal treatment targets and medication management of hypertension in NH residents have not been well addressed in clinical practice guidelines and research. In conducting this review, our goal is to identify key gaps in evidence and define research priorities to help improve guidelines and care for NH residents with hypertension. Specifically, the 2017 AHA/ACC guidelines support a target of <130/80 mmHg for ambulatory adults age 65 or older [22], a revision from their earlier 2013 guidelines recommending a BP target of <140/90 mmHg. With the growing number of older adults, an estimated 27 million adults will receive nursing home (NH) or home-based services by 2050 [2]. With the growing number of older adults, an estimated 27 million adults will receive nursing home (NH) or home-based services by 2050 [2]. Randomized Controlled Trials (RCTs)Table 1 provides a summary of recent RCTs testing hypertension management approaches in older patients, with varying generalizability to NH residents.RCTs Comparing More Intensive vs. Less Intensive Control/BP TargetsA systematic review of past RCTs showed insufficient evidence to support more intensive control over higher BP targets among older adults [27]. Therefore, the benefit of intensive control can only be inferred for populations reflecting fit, ambulatory older adults.The SPRINT trial excluded adults with a history of stroke [28], and there is generally a lack of available evidence regarding risks and benefits of more intensive control in older adults with a stroke history. “PAST-BP” was a trial among older adults in primary care settings within the United Kingdom which found no difference in systolic BP at follow-up. PODCAST was a smaller trial among older adults, including those with cognitive impairment, and described a non-significant benefit in cognition (secondary endpoint) with more intensive BP control [34]. PODCAST was a smaller trial among older adults, including those with cognitive impairment, and described a non-significant benefit in cognition (secondary endpoint) with more intensive BP control [34]. Clearly, there is a lack of RCTs powered to detect patient-centered outcomes (i.e., recurrent stroke with sub-analyses of stroke type, cognitive function) and representative of older adults in NH with a history of stroke and stroke-related cognitive impairment.RCTs Comparing Deprescribing of Antihypertensives vs. No DeprescribingOther RCTs (bottom of Table 1) have focused on interventions to de-intensify antihypertensive medications (i.e., “deprescribing” interventions) in patients with characteristics reflective of typical NH populations, including both patients with diagnosis of hypertension as well as patients with other CV indications for antihypertensive treatment. These deprescribing RCTs mainly assessed the impact of interventions to de-intensify antihypertensive medications on process measures such as number of antihypertensives and changes in BP, and less often examined patient-centered outcomes (e.g., CV events, mortality, adverse drug events). Compared to usual care, deprescribing rates were higher in the deprescribing intervention group, with no significant differences in secondary outcomes of changes in pulse or SBP among those deprescribed. An ongoing study among ambulatory adults aged ≥80 years, OPTiMISE, will describe the impact of deprescribing antihypertensives compared to usual care in primary care settings on BP control at 12 weeks [37]. Most RCTs excluded NH residents as well as older adults who were very frail, cognitively impaired, or nearing the end-of-life, possibly due to ethical and feasibility challenges, thereby limiting their generalizability to NH residents [17]. NH residents with hypertension represent a complex population that may require blood pressure (BP) targets and medication regimens that are tailored to their unique needs. PARTAGE was a large, retrospective cohort analysis of NH residents aged ≥80 years which showed an association between more intensive BP targets and CV and non-CV related death within 2 years of follow-up [6]. Another study included Medicare beneficiaries in NHs and assessed the association between number of antihypertensives and CV and non-CV outcomes, stratified by diagnosis of dementia [8]. The Health ABC cohort study did not find an association between use of antihypertensives (measured by participant interview) with recurrent falls in the following year [42]. For both studies, a strength was that several patient-relevant demographics and outcomes were captured by patient interview and assessment, which helped to accurately capture baseline confounders.Observational Studies Comparing Treatment IntensificationOne national cohort study among older U.S. Veterans receiving care at the Veterans Health Administration (VA) also demonstrated that antihypertensive intensification at hospital discharge was associated with increased all-cause re-hospitalization rates and serious adverse events at 30-day follow-up, compared to no intensification [44]. However, the relatively small effect sizes observed meant that the researchers could not rule out the possibility for confounding by an unmeasured variable.Observational Studies Comparing Treatment Deintensification/DeprescribingWe identified only one recent study, conducted in VA nursing homes, that directly examines the effect of deprescribing antihypertensives among those with a hypertension diagnosis in nursing home residents. However, the relatively small effect sizes observed meant that the researchers could not rule out the possibility for confounding by an unmeasured variable.Observational Studies Comparing Treatment Deintensification/DeprescribingWe identified only one recent study, conducted in VA nursing homes, that directly examines the effect of deprescribing antihypertensives among those with a hypertension diagnosis in nursing home residents. However, the relatively small effect sizes observed meant that the researchers could not rule out the possibility for confounding by an unmeasured variable.Observational Studies Comparing Treatment Deintensification/DeprescribingWe identified only one recent study, conducted in VA nursing homes, that directly examines the effect of deprescribing antihypertensives among those with a hypertension diagnosis in nursing home residents. However, the relatively small effect sizes observed meant that the researchers could not rule out the possibility for confounding by an unmeasured variable.Observational Studies Comparing Treatment Deintensification/DeprescribingWe identified only one recent study, conducted in VA nursing homes, that directly examines the effect of deprescribing antihypertensives among those with a hypertension diagnosis in nursing home residents. 