Excellent reviews of the studies establishing this neurotrophic hypothesis have been published. BDNF signaling through the TrkB neurotrophin receptor has been established as a major regulator of adult fear circuitry function as well as expression of fear behavior. However, structural and functional development of the human brain is a nonlinear process,[23, 29, 66] giving rise to a developmental mismatch model, suggesting that during adolescence subcortical regions are further ahead in their maturation trajectories compared to prefrontal ones. [67] Consistent with this model, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans of human cortical gray matter for subjects between the ages of 4 and 21 years show that high-order association cortices mature later in development compared to sensorimotor regions, whose function they integrate. [68] In the prefrontal cortex, maximum synaptic density peaks at around 4 years of age,[69] followed by a substantial reduction in gray matter between adolescence and adulthood thought to be due to increased myelination in peripheral regions of the cortex that regulate cognitive processes. [70] There is an about 17% decrease in gray matter volume in the human prefrontal cortex between the ages of 10 and 26. [70] There is an about 17% decrease in gray matter volume in the human prefrontal cortex between the ages of 10 and 26. [71] This earlier maturation of limbic regions compared to prefrontal regions in humans provides a basis for nonlinear changes in behavioral phenotypes across development. [77] Thus, during early adolescence, WT mice undergo a disjunction in fear expression in which they are particularly sensitive to cued fear associations and insensitive to contextual fear associations. In addition, although BDNF has been established as a key factor in the developing brain for regulating the critical period related to visual system plasticity,[5, 6] its role in the developing fear circuitry has only recently been examined. In addition, although BDNF has been established as a key factor in the developing brain for regulating the critical period related to visual system plasticity,[5, 6] its role in the developing fear circuitry has only recently been examined. Monocular deprivation during a defined postnatal time window leads to persistent loss of visual acuity. In contrast, less is known about the impact of BDNF signaling on fear-related circuits in this time frame that spans the third to fourth postnatal week. In contrast, less is known about the impact of BDNF signaling on fear-related circuits in this time frame that spans the third to fourth postnatal week. [40, 83] First, we have sought to determine the impact of the BDNF SNP on the contextual fear retrieval. [40, 83] First, we have sought to determine the impact of the BDNF SNP on the contextual fear retrieval. [40, 83] First, we have sought to determine the impact of the BDNF SNP on the contextual fear retrieval. [40, 83] First, we have sought to determine the impact of the BDNF SNP on the contextual fear retrieval. In WT mice, contextual fear expression is temporarily suppressed during a distinct period in adolescence, but re-emerges at later, postadolescent ages. [45, 84] TrkB.T1 receptors primarily play a role as BDNF scavengers or dominant negative receptors sequestering BDNF that would otherwise lead to activation of full-length TrkB receptors and downstream signaling cascades. [45, 84] TrkB.T1 receptors primarily play a role as BDNF scavengers or dominant negative receptors sequestering BDNF that would otherwise lead to activation of full-length TrkB receptors and downstream signaling cascades. 3C), suggesting that complete loss of TrkB.T1 may have led to an enhanced functional maturation of hippocampal-amygdala-prefrontal circuitry via increased signaling through full-length TrkB. 3C), suggesting that complete loss of TrkB.T1 may have led to an enhanced functional maturation of hippocampal-amygdala-prefrontal circuitry via increased signaling through full-length TrkB. 3C), suggesting that complete loss of TrkB.T1 may have led to an enhanced functional maturation of hippocampal-amygdala-prefrontal circuitry via increased signaling through full-length TrkB. Our previous studies implicate BDNF in modulating contextual fear learning during adolescence,[44] however, it is still unclear what the developmental impact of the BDNF Val66Met SNP is on cue fear extinction. Our previous studies implicate BDNF in modulating contextual fear learning during adolescence,[44] however, it is still unclear what the developmental impact of the BDNF Val66Met SNP is on cue fear extinction. Our previous studies implicate BDNF in modulating contextual fear learning during adolescence,[44] however, it is still unclear what the developmental impact of the BDNF Val66Met SNP is on cue fear extinction. Neurotrophins, comprising of NGF, BDNF, NT-3, NT-4, are a unique family of polypeptide growth factors that influence the proliferation, differentiation, survival, and death of neuronal and non-neuronal cells. In all, these analyses of the BDNF neurotrophin system across postnatal development demonstrate the complexity of the interactions between molecular function, development, and behavioral subdomains and that a polymorphism may confer both risk and resilience for anxiety, depending on the timing and nature of fear exposures. ProBDNF is also a biologically active signaling molecule,[15–17] however, its effects on neuronal survival and functioning are to a large degree opposite to those of mature BDNF. ProBDNF is also a biologically active signaling molecule,[15–17] however, its effects on neuronal survival and functioning are to a large degree opposite to those of mature BDNF. ProBDNF is also a biologically active signaling molecule,[15–17] however, its effects on neuronal survival and functioning are to a large degree opposite to those of mature BDNF. ProBDNF is also a biologically active signaling molecule,[15–17] however, its effects on neuronal survival and functioning are to a large degree opposite to those of mature BDNF. Brain-Derived Neurotrophic FactorDetection of BDNF and its isoforms has proven challenging in the developing brain due to relatively low abundance of the growth factor. Brain-Derived Neurotrophic FactorDetection of BDNF and its isoforms has proven challenging in the developing brain due to relatively low abundance of the growth factor. Brain-Derived Neurotrophic FactorDetection of BDNF and its isoforms has proven challenging in the developing brain due to relatively low abundance of the growth factor. Brain-Derived Neurotrophic FactorDetection of BDNF and its isoforms has proven challenging in the developing brain due to relatively low abundance of the growth factor. In the olfactory bulb and hypothalamus, levels also peak between P20 and P30. In the olfactory bulb and hypothalamus, levels also peak between P20 and P30. Detection of the prodomain in murine hippocampus is first observed at P5. [9] Developmentally, WT prodomain levels peak after the time of highest proBDNF expression, when cleavage of proBDNF becomes more efficient. [9] Developmentally, WT prodomain levels peak after the time of highest proBDNF expression, when cleavage of proBDNF becomes more efficient. [15] The prodomain is secreted from cultured neurons and alters neuronal processes involved in learning and memory. [37, 38] Additionally, patients with PTSD carrying the Met allele exhibit poorer response to exposure-based cognitive behavior therapy. [37, 38] Additionally, patients with PTSD carrying the Met allele exhibit poorer response to exposure-based cognitive behavior therapy. [39] At a cellular level, the presence of the Met allele results in altered availability of the variant BDNFMet protein. [45] The truncated TrkB protein, on the other hand, increases between P2 and P50 and may be the predominant form in adult rat hippocampus, hypothalamus, and forebrain[45–47] (Fig. Analyses in mice have shown that hippocampal p75NTR levels are highest in the first postnatal week, with a significant reduction by 4 weeks and minimal expression by 6 weeks of age, recapitulating the proBDNF expression pattern[15, 17] (Fig. Analyses in mice have shown that hippocampal p75NTR levels are highest in the first postnatal week, with a significant reduction by 4 weeks and minimal expression by 6 weeks of age, recapitulating the proBDNF expression pattern[15, 17] (Fig. Analyses in mice have shown that hippocampal p75NTR levels are highest in the first postnatal week, with a significant reduction by 4 weeks and minimal expression by 6 weeks of age, recapitulating the proBDNF expression pattern[15, 17] (Fig. Analyses in mice have shown that hippocampal p75NTR levels are highest in the first postnatal week, with a significant reduction by 4 weeks and minimal expression by 6 weeks of age, recapitulating the proBDNF expression pattern[15, 17] (Fig. 