These difficulties were determined to be due to an unknown software update. This participant was provided with a headset that enabled her to hear with improved sound quality and increased her satisfaction of the program. Table 3 displays TUQ items and subscale scores. Rates of initiation after enrollment were not as high as targeted, mostly due to some individuals who enrolled in the program being discharged to a skilled nursing facility and not home. The immediate post-discharge period has been identified as a teachable moment and may be a time to engage and enhance patient activation, which has been associated with a decrease in hospital readmissions (Mitchell et al , 2014). Beginning contact with patients during hospitalization presents an opportunity to assess patients’ knowledge and understanding of their ability for self-management. In fact, the patient population enrolled in the current study had poor baseline diabetes knowledge with a mean DKT2 score of 63, which is lower than baseline scores reported for similar populations (Fitzgerald et al , 2016). Diabetes education delivered via telehealth has the potential to reduce hospitalizations while also increasing diabetes knowledge. This model of online education and training provides many benefits including the ability to individualize education sessions, flexibility in timing of sessions, and ease of accessibility. This model of online education and training provides many benefits including the ability to individualize education sessions, flexibility in timing of sessions, and ease of accessibility. Many stereotypes exist regarding older adults and their acceptance and use of technology. Many stereotypes exist regarding older adults and their acceptance and use of technology. These chronic comorbid conditions and lack of access to DSMES place older adults with diabetes at further risk for poor outcomes. The final sample was small for this limited feasibility study. The final sample was small for this limited feasibility study. Most participants completed the 1-hour sessions; however, one individual requested shorter sessions due to fatigue and inability to focus attention after long periods. Homebound older adults require alternative methods of DSMES delivery. A majority of participants were taking insulin for T2DM management. Finally, it is unknown whether these results would persist and if there would be sustained improvements in knowledge and A1C level over time. The provision of DSMES via telehealth technology (i.e., the use of telecommunication to deliver education via the internet) has the potential to provide individuals with the accessibility and convenience. This project included a trial of 1,665 beneficiaries randomized to either receiving nurse case manager telemedicine care every 4 to 6 weeks for 2 years or usual care. At 5 years, compared to the usual care group, those who received telemedicine case management had greater improvements in hemoglobin A1C (A1C) level, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol level, and blood pressure (Shea et al , 2006). Prior research has used a hospitalization or emergency department visit as a teachable moment (Esler & Bock, 2004; Fonarow, 2003; Graham et al , 2016). Prior research has used a hospitalization or emergency department visit as a teachable moment (Esler & Bock, 2004; Fonarow, 2003; Graham et al , 2016). Using a teachable moment as a framework, the current authors identified hospitalization as a time point to directly engage patients and telemedicine as an optimal delivery system for these generally older, sicker patients. Using a teachable moment as a framework, the current authors identified hospitalization as a time point to directly engage patients and telemedicine as an optimal delivery system for these generally older, sicker patients. Using a teachable moment as a framework, the current authors identified hospitalization as a time point to directly engage patients and telemedicine as an optimal delivery system for these generally older, sicker patients. DesignA pre/post quasi-experimental study was conducted between September 2017 and March 2018. DesignA pre/post quasi-experimental study was conducted between September 2017 and March 2018. DesignA pre/post quasi-experimental study was conducted between September 2017 and March 2018. Participants and SettingHospitalized older adults age ≥55 with T2DM were recruited. Electronic tablets with internet access were also provided to participants during the first home visit. Printed handouts provided step-by-step instructions with images showing where to turn on the tablet, adjust volume, how to access the appropriate icon that initiated the session, and how to conclude the session. The telehealth delivery method used Vidyo® software for synchronous videoconferencing. The telehealth delivery method used Vidyo® software for synchronous videoconferencing. Vidyo is HIPAA compliant.The APN/CDE set education goals together with each patient prior to starting the online sessions. Vidyo is HIPAA compliant.The APN/CDE set education goals together with each patient prior to starting the online sessions. Given the literature supporting the effectiveness of DSMES, Healthy People 2020 has made increasing the attendance of DSMES a priority (Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, 2012). Given the literature supporting the effectiveness of DSMES, Healthy People 2020 has made increasing the attendance of DSMES a priority (Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, 2012). Data CollectionData were collected in-person at enrollment and upon completion of the program and from review of the electronic health record (EHR). Due to the small sample size, data were reanalyzed using nonparametric Wilcoxon signed-rank test. Due to the small sample size, data were reanalyzed using nonparametric Wilcoxon signed-rank test. An alpha level of 0.05 was used for all tests of statistical significance. Of the 20 patients enrolled, 12 (60%) completed the intervention. There were limited technical issues. 