3-5, which compare the phylogenies of the three genes. In total there were 2199 significant χ2 peaks (P < 0.01, Bonferroni corrected) in PS120, 1030 in ompB, and 187 in ompA. In total there were 2199 significant χ2 peaks (P < 0.01, Bonferroni corrected) in PS120, 1030 in ompB, and 187 in ompA. In total there were 2199 significant χ2 peaks (P < 0.01, Bonferroni corrected) in PS120, 1030 in ompB, and 187 in ompA. It is noteworthy that this R. felis sequence is also partly responsible for the conflict between gene trees described above.Further support for recombination within the alignments comes from the Reticulate test. In all three cases, the NSS was higher than expected (ompB, NSS = 0.83, P = 0.001; PS120, NSS = 0.78, P < 0.0001; ompA, NSS = 0.92, P = 0.01). Although linkage disequilibrium declines with distance in all three genes, there is only consistent statistical support for this relationship in the case of PS120 (Table 7). The reason for this difference is that while some codons in ompA and ompB are positively selected (dN/dS > 1), others are subject to selective constraints (dN/dS < 1), so the average dN/dS ratio is <1.It is premature to conclude that selection favoring antigenic escape mutants is the cause of positive selection on ompA and ompB. They are also both major antigens and are the principal candidates for vaccines against rickettsial infections (Croquet-Valdes et al  2001). They are also both major antigens and are the principal candidates for vaccines against rickettsial infections (Croquet-Valdes et al  2001). This led Raoult and Roux (1997) to suggest that transmission may often occur between ticks feeding at the same time on a single host. This led Raoult and Roux (1997) to suggest that transmission may often occur between ticks feeding at the same time on a single host. They also play a role in the bacteria entering vertebrate cells, and this could also potentially expose them to selection.I also found that positive selection is not a universal feature of rickettsial antigens, as there is no evidence for positive selection on the PS120 antigen. It is unlikely that functional constraints on PS120 are preventing evolutionary change, because many amino acids evolve nearly neutrally in this protein. It is possible that PS120 is a much less important elicitor of the immune response and is, therefore, under less selection for antigenic change. It is commonly thought that these clusters reflect regions of the protein detected by the host immune system. This suggests that the rate of genetic exchange in this genus may be unusually low. This suggests that the rate of genetic exchange in this genus may be unusually low. This recombination can be viewed as occurring at an intermediate taxonomic scale to the previous work described above, which looked for genetic exchange between either distantly related taxa (Karlin 2001) or closely related strains of the same species (Andersson et al  1998; Ogata et al  2001). This recombination can be viewed as occurring at an intermediate taxonomic scale to the previous work described above, which looked for genetic exchange between either distantly related taxa (Karlin 2001) or closely related strains of the same species (Andersson et al  1998; Ogata et al  2001). This suggests that the majority of nucleotides in the genome share a common phylogenetic history. This suggests that the majority of nucleotides in the genome share a common phylogenetic history. Although many antigens evolve rapidly due to selection to escape the acquired immune response of the host, previous studies have concluded that this is not the case for rOmpA (Fournier et al  1998). There were, however, significant differences in the phylogenetic trees inferred from two of the genes. 6) Such recombinant sequences can result in the recovery of trees that do not reflect the true phylogeny of either parental sequence (David and Keith 2002). I also found that the rate of recombination between different species of Rickettsia is low. The PS120 alignment includes amino acids 12–1020 of a total of 1026. Tree ReconstructionThe phylogenetic trees of these genes were reconstructed by maximum likelihood with the program PAUP* v.4.0b8 (Swofford 1998). The louse-vectored bacterium Rickettsia prowazekii causes one of the most severe diseases, epidemic typhus, which kills 10–30% of infected patients (Raoult and Roux 1997). The phylogeny of PS120 was reconstructed using the TVM + G model, which is identical to GTR + G except that the two types of transitions (A-G and C-T) occur at the same rate. The maximum likelihood topology was reconstructed by a heuristic search using nearest-neighbor interchanges. The null distribution of the likelihood ratio test statistic (2Δl, where Δl is the difference between the log-likelihood scores of the two models) can be approximated using the χ2 distribution with the degrees of freedom being the difference in the number of free parameters between the two models (two when comparing M7 and M8 and four when comparing M0 and M3). Sites with high probabilities of belonging to the class with ω > 1 are likely to be under positive selection. Sites with high probabilities of belonging to the class with ω > 1 are likely to be under positive selection. Sites with high probabilities of belonging to the class with ω > 1 are likely to be under positive selection. Sites with high probabilities of belonging to the class with ω > 1 are likely to be under positive selection. 1 and 2) was calculated as the average of the ω ratios across the all the ω classes from model 8, with the posterior probabilities used as weights. We then tested whether this significantly reduced the likelihood of the topology relative to the maximum likelihood topology using the SH test (Goldman et al  2000; Shimodaira and Hasegawa 1999), implemented in the program PAUP* v.4.0b8 (Swofford 1998) using the RELL approximation. Then, for every pair of sequences in the triplet, a 100-bp window was slid along the alignment in one-nucleotide steps. At each step, the number of variable sites was compared in the left and right halves of the window using a χ2 test. Potential breakpoints correspond to peaks in the values of χ2. Potential breakpoints correspond to peaks in the values of χ2. All P values were Bonferroni corrected for multiple tests performed on each alignment. First, a matrix is constructed, each cell of which is a pairwise comparison of two phylogenetically informative sites (excluding sites with more than two states). First, a matrix is constructed, each cell of which is a pairwise comparison of two phylogenetically informative sites (excluding sites with more than two states). The outer bacterial membrane is covered by a protein layer arranged in a regular crystalline array (Carl et al  1990; Ching et al  1990). The permutation test included sites with two segregating alleles and was performed using the program LDhat (McVean et al  2002). The analysis was then repeated including only those sites at which both alleles occurred at frequencies of >10%. The analysis was then repeated including only those sites at which both alleles occurred at frequencies of >10%. The ω ratio of the PS120 encoding gene is highly heterogeneous across codons (M1 vs M3; Tables 4 and 5). However, this is not a robust result because the ω ratio is only slightly greater than 1 (Table 4). However, this is not a robust result because the ω ratio is only slightly greater than 1 (Table 4). However, this is not a robust result because the ω ratio is only slightly greater than 1 (Table 4). However, this is not a robust result because the ω ratio is only slightly greater than 1 (Table 4). This suggests that there are many regions of this protein subject to few functional constraints. 