As an internal program review for performance improvement, the study was exempt from institutional review board (IRB) review. Given the selection bias associated with requesting a palliative consult, we used propensity score matching to identify a representative control cohort. Central line blood stream infections are also a component of the Medicare hospital-acquired condition program; however, during data verification, an error was identified in how these data were extracted to the data warehouse and it had to be excluded from the analysis. As of 2012, greater than 60% of hospitals with at least 50 beds reported having a palliative care team.1 In the United States, palliative care expansion is driven by a recognition that 25% of healthcare expenditures occur in the last year of life and do not have associated improvements in patient quality of life.2 By shifting focus toward patient goals and preferences, palliative care consultation improves symptom control and quality of life, and reduces costs.3 The propensity matching performed well generating a cohort that was statistically similar to the palliative cohort on general demographics, but the palliative patients still exhibited higher rates of patients with the most severe illnesses or the highest risk of mortality compared to their matched controls. In our population, the palliative care group maintains higher total hospitalization charges, likely driven by the longer time spent in the ICU and a greater overall hospital LOS. However, when evaluating the charges/day, the palliative care group has an average daily charge that is $2353 less than the control group (p < 0.001). However, when evaluating the charges/day, the palliative care group has an average daily charge that is $2353 less than the control group (p < 0.001). In contrast, there were higher rates of dialysis, C-diff infection, MRSA bacteremia, and total ventilator hours. In both developed and developing countries, there is a struggle to fund palliative care as it can be difficult to fully measure the true avoided costs associated with a palliative care consult.4-6 There further is limited economic evidence or research in palliative care to help programs understand how to get their systems to provide supportive funding.7 Given varying funding structures, individual programs will have to think creatively about how they can document value for their program. On the value-based outcomes, there is no longer a difference in readmission rates, while higher rates of dialysis, C-diff, MRSA, and ventilator hours persist. This analysis of our inpatient palliative care program reveals that even as there is an improving awareness about end-of-life planning among the public and increased training in this area among physicians, an expert palliative hospital consultation continues to be associated with reduced hospitalization charges. In contrast, the palliative team exhibited clear success in the reduction of hospital readmissions. The key metrics will vary across international payment systems, but this study provides a roadmap for analyzing metrics once those key metrics are identified. Palliative care remains an essential tool for hospital systems looking for a proven patient-centered, value-based approach to care. Palliative care remains an essential tool for hospital systems looking for a proven patient-centered, value-based approach to care. 