Similar effects were seen if the mother had two wild type copies of CYP2E1 (44) or AhR (45). Most have focused specifically on changes in DNA methylation and histone modifications. In this manner, we will seek to understand the complex interplay of genomic and epigenomic factors which relate a given clinical condition or phenotype, to susceptibility by virtue of genotype and environmental exposure. Non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) also epigenetically regulate gene expression. Non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) also epigenetically regulate gene expression. The addition of post-translational modifications to the histone proteins is another means of modifying gene expression without altering the underlying genetic code. Acetylation of Lysine 14 of histone H3 is associated with maintaining a euchromatic, or open, chromatin state (54). The correlation between IUGR and epigenetic changes in the offspring is a field that has recently been gaining attention. IUGR associated with maternal tobacco smoke is usually attributed to uteroplacental insufficiency. IUGR associated with maternal tobacco smoke is usually attributed to uteroplacental insufficiency. IUGR associated with maternal tobacco smoke is usually attributed to uteroplacental insufficiency. IUGR associated with maternal tobacco smoke is usually attributed to uteroplacental insufficiency. IUGR associated with maternal tobacco smoke is usually attributed to uteroplacental insufficiency. Using the BUAL method in rat, the methylation status of DNA within pancreatic islets of IUGR offspring was determined. An evaluation of more than 37,000 self identified smokers from a population-based perinatal database collected at the University of Utah (2008, (9)) supported the observation made five decades ago by Simpson and Linda: maternal cigarette use bears deleterious affect on fetal growth. Pdx1 expression was permanently reduced in IUGR offspring and this reduction was characterized by changing histone modification and DNA methylation patterns within the promoter region. Pdx1 expression was permanently reduced in IUGR offspring and this reduction was characterized by changing histone modification and DNA methylation patterns within the promoter region. The fetal origins of adult disease hypothesis postulates that adverse exposures in utero make an individual susceptible to the adult onset of metabolic disease, such as cardiovascular and diabetes (62-64). The fetal origins of adult disease hypothesis postulates that adverse exposures in utero make an individual susceptible to the adult onset of metabolic disease, such as cardiovascular and diabetes (62-64). The fetal origins of adult disease hypothesis postulates that adverse exposures in utero make an individual susceptible to the adult onset of metabolic disease, such as cardiovascular and diabetes (62-64). Although smoking per se did not affect global methylation, a significant correlation between paternal DNA methylation and that of the offspring was lost if either the father or offspring ever smoked. Smoking may therefore affect global DNA methylation. In a study of global DNA methylation in 85 blood samples from women as part of the National Collaborative Perinatal Project in N Y, prenatal smoke exposure showed a statistically significant association with higher levels of DNA methylation in adult women (66). Global DNA methylation status in newborn cord blood is associated with cord blood serum cotinine levels (68). In a study of 30 newborns with high, low or very low levels of cotinine in the serum, global DNA methylation showed an inverse relationship with cord blood cotinine levels. Global DNA methylation levels were lowest in newborns with the highest serum cotinine levels. This hypomethylation was significantly correlated with the decrease in gene expression. This hypomethylation was significantly correlated with the decrease in gene expression. More detailed analysis are in order to determine if other epigenetic changes such as histone modifications or non-coding RNAs are affected as well. The significance of the changes in DNA methylation patterns needs to be determined. Although our discussion herein is unique to maternal tobacco exposure and sequeale in the fetus, it is not without broader implications to understanding biologic plausibility and merit of studies on exposure and genotype. Although our discussion herein is unique to maternal tobacco exposure and sequeale in the fetus, it is not without broader implications to understanding biologic plausibility and merit of studies on exposure and genotype. Although our discussion herein is unique to maternal tobacco exposure and sequeale in the fetus, it is not without broader implications to understanding biologic plausibility and merit of studies on exposure and genotype. This is especially pronounced in woman who smoke >10 cigarettes/day (10). Women who quit smoking during pregnancy have infants who weigh more than those who continue to smoke, and also have an increased likelihood of having infants who weigh the same when compared to women who never smoked (11). (10) This state of chronic hypoxia could potentially explain growth restriction after in utero tobacco exposure; however, it does not completely address the observation that not all infants exposed to tobacco are small for gestational age. (10) This state of chronic hypoxia could potentially explain growth restriction after in utero tobacco exposure; however, it does not completely address the observation that not all infants exposed to tobacco are small for gestational age. (10) This state of chronic hypoxia could potentially explain growth restriction after in utero tobacco exposure; however, it does not completely address the observation that not all infants exposed to tobacco are small for gestational age. (10) This state of chronic hypoxia could potentially explain growth restriction after in utero tobacco exposure; however, it does not completely address the observation that not all infants exposed to tobacco are small for gestational age. Preterm birth is defined as birth occurring prior to 37 weeks completed gestational age. Preterm birth is defined as birth occurring prior to 37 weeks completed gestational age. Preterm birth is defined as birth occurring prior to 37 weeks completed gestational age. In addition to preterm birth, smoking has been linked to preterm premature rupture of membranes (preterm PROM). This process is defined as rupture of membranes prior to 37 weeks of gestation and is the second most common cause of preterm delivery. A study preformed at George Washington Hospital was able to show that women with salivary cotinine levels of greater than 200ng/ml had a significantly lower incidence of preeclampsia, infants with lower birth weights and a higher incidence of small for gestational age infants than women with cotinine levels of 200ng/ml or less (23). Polymorphisms of a myriad of genes involved in the detoxification of harmful chemicals and their metabolic intermediates from tobacco smoke tweak an individual's ability to metabolize different classes of potential carcinogens (Summarized in (Table 2).Similarly, not all individuals exposed to tobacco smoke in utero are growth restricted. PAH can be found in the environment and the carcinogenic properties are well characterized. (29, 30) Catalysis of PAH usually requires the coordination of two phases of enzymatic activity. The first step in processing xenobiotic compounds is metabolism by the Phase I enzymes, which include members of the Cytochrome P450 (CYP) family and Epoxide Hydrolase (31). CYP2A6, a Phase I enzyme, is the major Phase I CYP family member enzyme responsible for breaking down nicotine (32) (Figure 1C). (35) Because the products from Phase I metabolism are potentially toxic to the cell due to their high reactivity, coordination of both phases of enzymatic activity is essential for cell survival. Maternal CYP1A1 genotype was determined as either AA, Aa or aa, where “a” represents the well-characterized MspI polymorphism (37). When comparing non smoking mothers with the AA genotypes of CYP1A1 and the GSTT1 present allele to smoking mothers with either Aa or aa CYP1A1 and GSTT1 (null) there is also a significant association with pre term delivery and lower gestational age (38, 39). In mothers who smoked, offspring null for GSTT1 showed a reduced mean birth weight of 262g compared with fetuses that had the GSTT1 allele. 