Simple inspection of the FO-FC difference map, which highlights discrepancies between experimental data and the structural model, revealed the presence of substantial unexplained electron density (positive 7.5σ peak) at the exact location of the leucine-binding pocket observed in the leucine-bound Sestrin2 (PDB ID: 5DJ4, Fig. The mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) couples cell growth with the availability of biosynthetic inputs such as amino acids (1,2). It is the main precipitant at 1.15 M concentration and it could at least mimic the interaction of the carboxyl group of leucine. Nonetheless, refining PDB ID: 5CUF with malonate also eliminated the FO-FC map peak and improved the R-factors of the model (Fig. As with PDB ID: 5CUF and PDB ID: 5DJ4, refining the structure with leucine eliminated the FO-FC peak and improved the model statistics (Fig. The leucine-binding site of Sestrin2 consists of a shallow hydrophobic pocket flanked on each side by opposing positive and negative charges contributed by Arg390 and Glu451, respectively, making it well suited to specifically accommodate zwitterionic α-amino acids with short aliphatic sidechains (6). Crystallization is, after all, a purification method and thus perfectly suited to enrich a small fraction of leucine-bound Sestrin2 in a large background of non-crystallizing apo-Sestrin. Because all three Sestrin2 crystal structures crystallize under highly similar conditions, in the same crystal form, and that the largest and best diffracting crystals grow in the presence of leucine, we conclude that all reported structures are best interpreted as being leucine bound. Because all three Sestrin2 crystal structures crystallize under highly similar conditions, in the same crystal form, and that the largest and best diffracting crystals grow in the presence of leucine, we conclude that all reported structures are best interpreted as being leucine bound. The leucine-dependent dissociation of Sestrin2 from GATOR2 represents the critical first step in the activation of mTORC1 by leucine, and understanding how leucine-binding alters the conformation of Sestrin2 to disrupt its interaction with GATOR2 remains a major open question in the field. Protein production and purificationHuman Sestrin2 was expressed and purified as described previously (6). Cells were grown at 37°C to 0.6 OD, then protein production was induced with 0.2 mM IPTG at 18 °C for 12–14 h. Cells were collected by centrifugation at 6,000g, resuspended in lysis buffer (50 mM potassium phosphate, pH 8.0, 500 mM NaCl, 30 mM imidazole, 3 mM β-mercaptoethanol (βME) and 1 mM PMSF) and lysed with a cell disruptor (Constant Systems). After washing of the beads with lysis buffer, the protein was eluted in 250 mM imidazole, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl and 3 mM βME. The eluted Sestrin2 was then incubated with 3C protease and dialyzed overnight at 4 °C into 10 mM potassium phosphate, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl, 0.1 mM EDTA and 1 mM DTT, followed by a second cation-exchange chromatography run on an SP sepharose fast flow column (GE Healthcare) with a linear NaCl gradient. Briefly, a single 2 µl drop containing crystals of Sestrin2 was diluted into a 50 µl solution of mother liquor (100 mM MES, pH 6.0, 1.2 M disodium malonate, and 1% (v/v) Jeffamine ED 2001), vortexed for 5 minutes in the presence of a polystyrene bead, then diluted again into 500 µl of mother liquor. This solution was then diluted at a ratio of 1:1,000 to obtain the final microseed stock. The phase problem was solved by molecular replacement using our published Sestrin2 structure (PDB ID: 5DJ4) as the search model in the Phaser-MR program, run as part of the Phenix Autosol program (19) (space group I23, 5 molecules per asymmetric unit). Subsequent refinement was carried out using phenix.refine. Refinement of the models either with or without bound-leucine built in was performed using phenix.refine. 