3A, B and Movie 3). Pericentrin labelling was maintained in the presence of zVAD.FMK, however, implicating caspases in this process (unpublished observations). To examine whether microtubules also play a role, we first set out to identify a cell-line that undergoes apoptotic fragmentation in vitro with physiological kinetics (i.e. To examine whether microtubules also play a role, we first set out to identify a cell-line that undergoes apoptotic fragmentation in vitro with physiological kinetics (i.e. To examine whether microtubules also play a role, we first set out to identify a cell-line that undergoes apoptotic fragmentation in vitro with physiological kinetics (i.e. To examine whether microtubules also play a role, we first set out to identify a cell-line that undergoes apoptotic fragmentation in vitro with physiological kinetics (i.e. As expected, fragmentation was blocked by zVAD.FMK, confirming that this is a caspase-dependent process (Fig. We therefore measured the affect of actin disruption in UV-treated A431 cells, but found no significantly influence fragmentation (although PARP cleavage was marginally elevated: Fig. As with other cell-types, (Lane et al , 2005) partial release of A431 cells from the substratum was accompanied by dynamic surface blebbing lasting about 40 mins (supplementary material Fig. Inclusion of fluorescent annexin V in the assay demonstrated that PS exposure occurs ~20–30 mins after the appearance of the first spikes (data not shown). Importantly, nocodazole treatment blocked spike formation (supplementary material Fig. In the presence of taxol, one or two much thicker spikes were produced, but these were clearly abnormal (supplementary material Fig. Apoptotic bodies remained attached along the lengths of spikes, or in clusters at their tips, and these contained loops of microtubules and often also fragments of condensed chromatin (Fig. Apoptotic bodies remained attached along the lengths of spikes, or in clusters at their tips, and these contained loops of microtubules and often also fragments of condensed chromatin (Fig. Golgi fragmentation (Lane et al , 2002; Sesso et al , 1999); secretory membrane traffic arrest (Lowe et al , 2004)). In transverse sections of apoptotic spikes, microtubule profiles could clearly be identified (Fig. In transverse sections of apoptotic spikes, microtubule profiles could clearly be identified (Fig. In transverse sections of apoptotic spikes, microtubule profiles could clearly be identified (Fig. In transverse sections of apoptotic spikes, microtubule profiles could clearly be identified (Fig. Time-lapse imaging revealed that EB1-GFP puncta (Morrison et al , 2002) continue to track with a subset of microtubules in apoptotic A431 cells, with movement almost exclusively away from the cell body (Fig. 8B and supplementary material Movie 7), suggesting that they are dynamic and predominantly plus ends outwards. Apoptotic spikes enhance interactions with macrophagesThe terminal phase of apoptosis in most tissues is phagocytosis. (Casciola-Rosen et al , 1996; Ogden et al , 2001)), thereby stimulating rapid recognition and engulfment. (Casciola-Rosen et al , 1996; Ogden et al , 2001)), thereby stimulating rapid recognition and engulfment. (Casciola-Rosen et al , 1996; Ogden et al , 2001)), thereby stimulating rapid recognition and engulfment. (Casciola-Rosen et al , 1996; Ogden et al , 2001)), thereby stimulating rapid recognition and engulfment. However, these are soon replaced by extensive, dynamic bundles that perform three important roles: firstly, they contribute to the relocation of condensed chromatin into surface blebs; secondly, microtubules are required for cellular fragmentation; thirdly, by extending rigid cellular spikes, microtubules assist in apoptotic cell to phagocyte tethering. Notably, although the core centrioles remain essentially intact throughout apoptosis (as judged by continued labelling with GFP-centrin 2: Fig. 6C and supplementary material Movie 6). 6C and supplementary material Movie 6). Although we cannot rule out the former explanation, the fact that just a brief (40 mins) nocodazole treatment of apoptotic cells caused withdrawal of chromatin back towards the cell centre suggests that microtubules most likely resist some form of retractile pressure. Contractility generated by actin and active myosin II is the best candidate here – it is believed to provide the cortical squeezing forces that drive apoptotic surface blebbing (Coleman et al , 2001; Mills et al , 1998b; Mills et al , 1999; Sebbagh et al , 2001), and it deforms the nuclear envelope to allow chromatin budding (Croft et al , 2005; Lane et al , 2005). Importantly, recent evidence from actively blebbing, non-apoptotic cells suggests that contraction of newly-assembled actin/myosin II cables just beneath the plasma membrane is also required to withdraw surface blebs, in combination with plasma membrane tension and extracellular osmotic pressure (Charras et al , 2005). Hence, paradoxically, the same contractile forces appear to be required for the establishment of chromatin-rich surface blebs (Lane et al , 2005), and subsequently also for bleb retraction (Charras et al , 2005). The tensegrity model for cytoskeletal function in cell morphogenesis explores the possibility that microtubules act as rigid struts against contractile actin-myosin forces to facilitate cell shape changes (see (Rodriguez et al , 2003)). The tensegrity model for cytoskeletal function in cell morphogenesis explores the possibility that microtubules act as rigid struts against contractile actin-myosin forces to facilitate cell shape changes (see (Rodriguez et al , 2003)). Due to our previous lack of appreciation of the presence of an apoptotic microtubule array (see (Mills et al , 1999)), the roles of actin-microtubule cross-linking proteins during apoptosis remain largely unexplored, although some are known to be caspase targets (including APC, cytoplasmic dynein/dynactin, plectin: see (Fischer et al , 2003)). Importantly, however, the RhoA signalling pathway that coordinates actin fibre length and myosin II activity is short-circuited during apoptosis by caspase cleavage and activation of the RhoA effector, ROCK I (Coleman et al , 2001; Sebbagh et al , 2001), suggesting that this regulatory crossroads may be redundant in the dying cell. A paradigm for microtubule-based cellular fragmentation is the terminal phase of thrombopoiesis, when megakaryocytes extend microtubule-rich proplatelets that bud to release platelets (Italiano et al , 1999). A paradigm for microtubule-based cellular fragmentation is the terminal phase of thrombopoiesis, when megakaryocytes extend microtubule-rich proplatelets that bud to release platelets (Italiano et al , 1999). Exposure of PS on the outer plasma membrane leaflet is generally accompanied by the appearance of altered glycoproteins and oxidised ligands that are thought to enhance the specificity of phagocyte recognition (Savill and Fadok, 2000). Our data show that microtubules contribute to the process of apoptotic body formation by helping to sustain the peripheral localisation of chromatin within surface blebs, and by facilitating cell fragmentation. Human GFP-Centrin 2 (White et al , 2000) was obtained from Jeff Salisbury (Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, MN). Human GFP-Centrin 2 (White et al , 2000) was obtained from Jeff Salisbury (Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, MN). Human GFP-Centrin 2 (White et al , 2000) was obtained from Jeff Salisbury (Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, MN). Human GFP-Centrin 2 (White et al , 2000) was obtained from Jeff Salisbury (Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, MN). Human GFP-Centrin 2 (White et al , 2000) was obtained from Jeff Salisbury (Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, MN). Inhibitors were used at the following final concentrations: latrunculin A (1.0 μM); Y27632 (100 μM); blebbistatin (12.5μm); nocodazole (5 μg/ml); taxol (20 μM); zVAD.FMK (50 μM). Fluorescence microscopy and live-cell imagingWide-field fluorescence images were obtained using an Olympus IX-71 inverted microscope (60x Uplan Fluorite objective 0.65–1.25 NA, at maximum aperture) fitted with a CoolSNAP HQ CCD camera (Photometrics, Tucson, AZ) driven by MetaMorph software (Universal Imaging Corporation, Downington, PA). Electron microscopyApoptotic A431 cells were obtained by aspiration of culture medium from a dish of UV-irradiated cells, fixed by adding an equal volume of 4% gluteraldehyde, then processed for transmission electron microscopy as described previously (Lane et al , 2005). The majority (65.2%) of apoptotic cells possessed chromatin-containing surface blebs (Fig. The majority (65.2%) of apoptotic cells possessed chromatin-containing surface blebs (Fig. These data suggest that microtubules and actin cooperate to drive apoptotic chromatin dispersal.Microtubules could play a direct role in chromatin dispersal, or they might be more passive, in resisting some form of retractile pressure. These data suggest that microtubules and actin cooperate to drive apoptotic chromatin dispersal.Microtubules could play a direct role in chromatin dispersal, or they might be more passive, in resisting some form of retractile pressure. These data suggest that microtubules and actin cooperate to drive apoptotic chromatin dispersal.Microtubules could play a direct role in chromatin dispersal, or they might be more passive, in resisting some form of retractile pressure. These data suggest that microtubules and actin cooperate to drive apoptotic chromatin dispersal.Microtubules could play a direct role in chromatin dispersal, or they might be more passive, in resisting some form of retractile pressure. These data suggest that microtubules and actin cooperate to drive apoptotic chromatin dispersal.Microtubules could play a direct role in chromatin dispersal, or they might be more passive, in resisting some form of retractile pressure. Addition of either drug individually caused a moderate shift from dispersed to compact chromatin (Fig. Together, these data suggest that the interphase microtubule network is disassembled early in the execution phase (as previously observed: (Bonfoco et al , 1996; Mills et al , 1998a; Mills et al , 1999)), but that it is replaced by an apoptotic microtubule array at later stages. Together, these data suggest that the interphase microtubule network is disassembled early in the execution phase (as previously observed: (Bonfoco et al , 1996; Mills et al , 1998a; Mills et al , 1999)), but that it is replaced by an apoptotic microtubule array at later stages. Together, these data suggest that the interphase microtubule network is disassembled early in the execution phase (as previously observed: (Bonfoco et al , 1996; Mills et al , 1998a; Mills et al , 1999)), but that it is replaced by an apoptotic microtubule array at later stages. In support of this, the majority of apoptotic microtubules were not recognised by antibodies to acetylated α-tubulin – a post-translational modification indicative of long-lived polymer ((Maruta et al , 1986): supplementary material Fig. 