Five days old flies were transferred to empty vials and temperature was raised to 38°C by submerging vials in a controlled-temperature water bath. We defined paralysis as a condition when a fly was paralyzed and unable to walk or keep standing position for at least 1 minute. Error bars indicate standard errors (SEM). We quantified the product of catalytic activity, CMP-Sia, by HPLC (the identity of product peaks was confirmed by mass spectrometry (Supplementary Material Fig. We quantified the product of catalytic activity, CMP-Sia, by HPLC (the identity of product peaks was confirmed by mass spectrometry (Supplementary Material Fig. These two assays were compared in a number of experiments, which indicated that the assays produce consistent results and have similar sensitivity. Thus, we used the two assays interchangeably in our further experiments.In our initial assays, we tested whether CSAS has a stable CMP-synthetase activity in vitro. Thus, we used the two assays interchangeably in our further experiments.In our initial assays, we tested whether CSAS has a stable CMP-synthetase activity in vitro. In standard assay conditions, DmCSAS activity declines precipitously at lower pH, dropping to 20% around pH 7.4 and becoming practically negligible below pH 7.0. In standard assay conditions, DmCSAS activity declines precipitously at lower pH, dropping to 20% around pH 7.4 and becoming practically negligible below pH 7.0. In standard assay conditions, DmCSAS activity declines precipitously at lower pH, dropping to 20% around pH 7.4 and becoming practically negligible below pH 7.0. In standard assay conditions, DmCSAS activity declines precipitously at lower pH, dropping to 20% around pH 7.4 and becoming practically negligible below pH 7.0. In standard assay conditions, DmCSAS activity declines precipitously at lower pH, dropping to 20% around pH 7.4 and becoming practically negligible below pH 7.0. We measured its kinetic parameters for a number of substrates, including several types of sialic acid and structurally similar molecules found in various organisms. While CMP-Neu5Gc is usually produced in mammalian cells from CMP-Neu5Ac by CMP-Neu5Ac hydroxylase, human cells lack this enzyme and can generate CMP-Neu5Gc by CSAS, indicating that CSAS-mediated activation of Neu5Gc from dietary sources and salvage pathway play biological roles in animal organisms [24–26]. The kinetics for Neu5Gc showed no saturation, so we could only estimate that the Km for Neu5Gc was > 3.5 mM (Fig. Thus the DmCSAS represents the first example of CMP-Sia synthetases with Golgi localization, which unveils an unprecedented example of a radical evolutionary change in subcellular localization of a metazoan enzyme that occurred within a family of orthologous proteins with conserved function. Thus the DmCSAS represents the first example of CMP-Sia synthetases with Golgi localization, which unveils an unprecedented example of a radical evolutionary change in subcellular localization of a metazoan enzyme that occurred within a family of orthologous proteins with conserved function. Thus the DmCSAS represents the first example of CMP-Sia synthetases with Golgi localization, which unveils an unprecedented example of a radical evolutionary change in subcellular localization of a metazoan enzyme that occurred within a family of orthologous proteins with conserved function. Similar to the Drosophila enzyme, HsCSAS could not utilize KDO as a substrate (Fig. Since the adaptation of insect synthetases to the milieu of the Golgi compartment is potentially associated with utilizing different metal cofactors (Fig. Since the adaptation of insect synthetases to the milieu of the Golgi compartment is potentially associated with utilizing different metal cofactors (Fig. Interestingly, the sequence alignment of the motif V indicated that one of these aspartic acids, thought to be essential for coordinating the catalytic metal ion [34], is not conserved in insect enzymes (Fig. Interestingly, the sequence alignment of the motif V indicated that one of these aspartic acids, thought to be essential for coordinating the catalytic metal ion [34], is not conserved in insect enzymes (Fig. Interestingly, the sequence alignment of the motif V indicated that one of these aspartic acids, thought to be essential for coordinating the catalytic metal ion [34], is not conserved in insect enzymes (Fig. The DmCSAS-DA protein was unable to rescue the phenotype (Fig. Our results suggested that insect and vertebrate CMP-Sia synthetases are regulated by different molecular and cellular mechanisms, which shed light on evolutionary adaptation of these proteins to distinct subcellular environments. Materials and reagentsSugars, nucleotides, mouse anti-FLAG antibody and FLAG affinity beads (anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel) were purchased from Sigma. Surprisingly, our sequence alignments revealed that the first D in this motif is not conserved and is substituted with E in insect CSAS sequences (Fig. The importance of the remaining D residue conserved in insect enzymes was examined in our analyses of DmCSAS-DA, the mutant version of DmCSAS with D228A substitution. The importance of the remaining D residue conserved in insect enzymes was examined in our analyses of DmCSAS-DA, the mutant version of DmCSAS with D228A substitution. The importance of the remaining D residue conserved in insect enzymes was examined in our analyses of DmCSAS-DA, the mutant version of DmCSAS with D228A substitution. The importance of the remaining D residue conserved in insect enzymes was examined in our analyses of DmCSAS-DA, the mutant version of DmCSAS with D228A substitution. The importance of the remaining D residue conserved in insect enzymes was examined in our analyses of DmCSAS-DA, the mutant version of DmCSAS with D228A substitution. The level of expression, subcellular localization and glycosylation of this mutant were all similar to those of the wildtype protein, which strongly suggested that DmCSAS-DA was normally expressed and properly folded (Fig. The analogous D211A mutation in the CMP-Sia synthetase from N. meningitidis also resulted in significant loss of activity, however some residual activity still remained [34]. Mammalian CMP-Sia synthetases commonly do not discriminate between these sialic acid versions (Fig. Mammalian CMP-Sia synthetases commonly do not discriminate between these sialic acid versions (Fig. Mammalian CMP-Sia synthetases commonly do not discriminate between these sialic acid versions (Fig. Mammalian CMP-Sia synthetases commonly do not discriminate between these sialic acid versions (Fig. 3E, [21, 23]), suggesting that the N-acetyl group plays a more important role in DmCSAS substrate recognition, as compared to mammalian CMP-Sia synthetases. 3E, [21, 23]), suggesting that the N-acetyl group plays a more important role in DmCSAS substrate recognition, as compared to mammalian CMP-Sia synthetases. This conclusion is consistent with the fact that KDN, a desamino form of sialic acid that carries a hydroxyl instead of the N-acetyl group [1], cannot be utilized by the Drosophila enzyme (Fig. Drosophila strains with GAL4 drivers were obtained from the Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center (Indiana University, Bloomington, IN). DmCSAS mutants and the FLAG-tagged DmCSAS construct were previously described [8]. DmCSAS mutants and the FLAG-tagged DmCSAS construct were previously described [8]. Expression constructs, site-directed mutagenesis and cloningThe UAS-CSAS-FLAG expression construct for in vivo expression was described previously [8]. They generate the activated sugar donor, CMP-sialic acid (CMP-Sia), from free sialic acid (Sia) and cytidine triphosphate (CTP). They generate the activated sugar donor, CMP-sialic acid (CMP-Sia), from free sialic acid (Sia) and cytidine triphosphate (CTP). For generating the CSAS-DA mutant, we used a PCR-based site-specific mutagenesis protocol [10] and changed the codon 228, GAC to GCC, which resulted in D228A mutation in the CSAS protein. For generating the CSAS-DA mutant, we used a PCR-based site-specific mutagenesis protocol [10] and changed the codon 228, GAC to GCC, which resulted in D228A mutation in the CSAS protein. For transient and stable transfections, we used Ca2+-phosphate protocol as previously described [11] or Effectene reagent (Qiagen) according to manufacturer’s protocol. The cells were lysed by sonication, using Branson Sonifier® 150. Lysis was completed by rocking vials on nutator for 20 min. To isolate FLAG-tagged proteins, 20 μl of anti-FLAG affinity beads (Sigma), prewashed in Lysis buffer, were added per 1 ml of lysate. All sample manipulations were performed on ice or at +4°C. All manipulations with samples, starting from tissue homogenization, were performed on ice or at +4°C. The reaction was mixed, centrifuged immediately for 30 sec at 3,000 rpm, and then 100 μl of supernatant was withdrawn and kept at −20°C as a sample corresponding to zero-time point. Reaction was stopped by transferring reaction tubes on ice for 5 min, followed by centrifugation through 10K Amicon Ultra spin filter (Merck Millipore) to remove beads and protein content. Briefly, components of reaction mixture were separated on a 4 × 250 mm CarboPac PA-1 column (Dionex) using Ultimate3000 HPLC system (Thermo) equipped with variable wavelength detector VWD-3100. Column was equilibrated with 5 mM NaOH (eluent A) and elution was performed at flow rate 1 ml/min, using a gradient of 1 M sodium acetate in 5 mM NaOH (10%, 8 min; linear gradient 10–50%, 16 min, linear gradient 50–100%, 6 min; 100%, 12 min). Column was equilibrated with 5 mM NaOH (eluent A) and elution was performed at flow rate 1 ml/min, using a gradient of 1 M sodium acetate in 5 mM NaOH (10%, 8 min; linear gradient 10–50%, 16 min, linear gradient 50–100%, 6 min; 100%, 12 min). Column was equilibrated with 5 mM NaOH (eluent A) and elution was performed at flow rate 1 ml/min, using a gradient of 1 M sodium acetate in 5 mM NaOH (10%, 8 min; linear gradient 10–50%, 16 min, linear gradient 50–100%, 6 min; 100%, 12 min). Column was equilibrated with 5 mM NaOH (eluent A) and elution was performed at flow rate 1 ml/min, using a gradient of 1 M sodium acetate in 5 mM NaOH (10%, 8 min; linear gradient 10–50%, 16 min, linear gradient 50–100%, 6 min; 100%, 12 min). The concentration of the product of enzymatic conversion of MESG substrate was detected with Ultrospec 2000 spectrophotometer (Pharmacia Biotech) at 360 nm. PPi concentrations were calculated with calibration curve plotted using PPi standards.We tested the effect of different components of CMP-Sia synthetase reaction on EnzChek-mediated detection and found that Cu2+, Co2+, Ni2+, Mn2+, Ca2+, Zn2+ and Fe2+ could significantly affect PPi measurements. Kinetic analysesKinetic parameters were determined for Neu5Ac, Neu5Gc and CTP at saturating concentration of one of the substrates and varied concentration of the second substrate. Furthermore, unlike other nucleotide-sugar synthetases that use phosphorylated sugar molecules as substrates, CMP-Sia synthetases can utilize non-phosphorylated sialic acid [5]. Furthermore, unlike other nucleotide-sugar synthetases that use phosphorylated sugar molecules as substrates, CMP-Sia synthetases can utilize non-phosphorylated sialic acid [5]. Fixed tissue was washed with PBT (PBS pH 7.5, 0.1% Triton X100, 1% BSA, 0.01% sodium azide) and analyzed by immunostaining and epifluorescent microscopy. Temperature-sensitive (TS) paralysis phenotype was assayed essentially as described previously [16]. For TS-paralysis assays, individual flies were collected on the day of eclosure and aged individually for 5 days. 