With their myelinated structure, peripheral nerves provide suitable structural bases to be assessed by DTI with FA measurements since diffusion is higher along axons than their perpendicular directions resulting in anisotropic diffusion. 6c and f show that the high intensity FA map (red hue) follows the anatomically confirmed sural nerve structure in coronal orientations. 6c and f show that the high intensity FA map (red hue) follows the anatomically confirmed sural nerve structure in coronal orientations. 6c and f show that the high intensity FA map (red hue) follows the anatomically confirmed sural nerve structure in coronal orientations. These figures demonstrate the localization of the diffusion indices corresponding to the sural nerves on the anatomical MRI references. These figures demonstrate the localization of the diffusion indices corresponding to the sural nerves on the anatomical MRI references. Three out of 25 subjects were excluded due to the difficulty in localization of the nerve caused by low SNR attributing to either motion or extremely small size and individual variations in the shape and location of the sural nerve.Table 2 lists diffusion values obtained from 22 normal subjects who have been scanned using 6, 15, and 32 gradient directions. Our data demonstrate that DTI at 3 T can be effectively used to localize the sural nerve at mid to lower calf and measure its diffusion indices such as FA and ADC. Although anatomical images are commonly acquired in the axial image orientation for the identification of the small sural nerve by radiologists, the axial DTI may be prone to the prominent partial volume effect. Since axial DTI is commonly limited in in-plane resolution (>2×2 mm2) and slice thickness (2–3 mm) to maintain appropriate SNR for detecting diffusion signal, the localization of the fine sural nerve structure may be problematic. The protocol provides a high in-plane resolution in the RL and AP directions for handling the small diameter while allowing lower resolution of 2 mm in the FH direction along the length of the nerve. The protocol provides a high in-plane resolution in the RL and AP directions for handling the small diameter while allowing lower resolution of 2 mm in the FH direction along the length of the nerve. The protocol provides a high in-plane resolution in the RL and AP directions for handling the small diameter while allowing lower resolution of 2 mm in the FH direction along the length of the nerve. Our image registration tool uses a diffusion image with b=0 to determine the registration parameters to align individual FA maps and compute the average of values in voxels in the ROI determined by the nerve anatomy. Our volumetric image registration method is reliable in providing an accurate means of measuring the diffusion values associated with the sural nerve anatomy and differentiate the nerve from other anatomical features. Our volumetric image registration method is reliable in providing an accurate means of measuring the diffusion values associated with the sural nerve anatomy and differentiate the nerve from other anatomical features. FA values of the sural nerves were determined by averaging voxels in the ROI that were thresholded at 0.3 below which represents a low anisotropy index associated with the surrounding muscle [10]. Considering that those reported values were obtained with measurements from less number of gradient directions (Nd=6,15), the higher limit in our FA values at 6 and 15 directions (Table 2) were 0.768 (0.659+0.109) and 0.689 (0.615+0.074), respectively, making the measurements of the sural nerve using less Nd in closer agreement, though in lower limit, with the previously reported values of the tibial nerve. One limiting factor in our protocol described is a relatively long data acquisition time, which spans to 20 min for acquiring 32-directional DTI. We anticipate that this protocol can be used to evaluate disease-associated changes in the sural nerve in patients with DPN with the overall goal to establish quantitative diffusion indices such as FA and ADC as non-invasive markers of axonal and myelin integrity in the sural and peroneal nerves. In summary, we have successfully demonstrated that DTI at 3 T can be effectively used to localize the sural nerve at the mid to lower calf level and to measure FA and ADC values in normal healthy volunteers. Studies have shown that more Nd produces better directional sensitivity and provides more accurate estimations of diffusion anisotropy. Studies have shown that more Nd produces better directional sensitivity and provides more accurate estimations of diffusion anisotropy. Serial sural nerve biopsies, historically used to quantitate myelinated fiber density [30] with diabetic peripheral neuropathy (DPN) [22,31–33], have been deemed too invasive [22,31,34]. Serial sural nerve biopsies, historically used to quantitate myelinated fiber density [30] with diabetic peripheral neuropathy (DPN) [22,31–33], have been deemed too invasive [22,31,34]. Serial sural nerve biopsies, historically used to quantitate myelinated fiber density [30] with diabetic peripheral neuropathy (DPN) [22,31–33], have been deemed too invasive [22,31,34]. Serial sural nerve biopsies, historically used to quantitate myelinated fiber density [30] with diabetic peripheral neuropathy (DPN) [22,31–33], have been deemed too invasive [22,31,34]. Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) is a magnetic resonance (MR) technique that can be used for gaining quantitative information about tissue water diffusion. This can potentially eliminate the need for repeat invasive biopsies and serve as a tool for making management decisions about treatment. The aims of our study are to establish an optimal DTI protocol for evaluating sural nerves and normative FA and ADC values in healthy subjects. SubjectsTwenty-five healthy volunteer subjects were recruited from the University of Michigan Clinical Studies Website (UMClinicalStudies.org) to participate in a calf area scanning of the sural nerve using DTI. The direction-dependent water diffusion from DTI measurements can be used to compute apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) and fractional anisotropy (FA). The direction-dependent water diffusion from DTI measurements can be used to compute apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) and fractional anisotropy (FA). The direction-dependent water diffusion from DTI measurements can be used to compute apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) and fractional anisotropy (FA). The direction-dependent water diffusion from DTI measurements can be used to compute apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) and fractional anisotropy (FA). The sural nerve ROI was thresholded at the FA value of 0.3, which represents a low anisotropy index associated with the surrounding muscle [6,12]. Image registration provides the identification and visualization of the nerve to validate the computed FA maps in anatomical reference images. Image registration provides the identification and visualization of the nerve to validate the computed FA maps in anatomical reference images. The EPI image acquired without diffusion weighting (b=0) was used for determining registration parameters for mapping diffusion data to anatomical volumes and the same transformation was used to map the FA values computed from DTI data acquired with 32, 15, and 6 gradient directions. By acquiring diffusion images in an adjusted coronal orientation (as described in Materials and methods) with the slice thickness of 0.5 mm, the sural nerve could be more easily localized and distinguished from the saphenous vein that runs in close proximity with the nerve.For each subject, an axial T2-weighted MRI scan was used to identify the sural nerve. 