Western blotting analysis of PECAM-1 immunoprecipitates revealed that ITIM phosphorylation and SHP-2 binding occurred in response to TGF-β, and were enhanced by concurrent stimulation with OKT3 (Fig. Western blotting analysis of PECAM-1 immunoprecipitates revealed that ITIM phosphorylation and SHP-2 binding occurred in response to TGF-β, and were enhanced by concurrent stimulation with OKT3 (Fig. Western blotting analysis of PECAM-1 immunoprecipitates revealed that ITIM phosphorylation and SHP-2 binding occurred in response to TGF-β, and were enhanced by concurrent stimulation with OKT3 (Fig. Western blotting analysis of PECAM-1 immunoprecipitates revealed that ITIM phosphorylation and SHP-2 binding occurred in response to TGF-β, and were enhanced by concurrent stimulation with OKT3 (Fig. Western blotting analysis of PECAM-1 immunoprecipitates revealed that ITIM phosphorylation and SHP-2 binding occurred in response to TGF-β, and were enhanced by concurrent stimulation with OKT3 (Fig. The present investigation was designed, therefore, to examine the hypothesis that PECAM-1 contributes to the inhibitory effects of TGF-β, a potent inhibitor of T cells that plays a major role in suppressing anti-tumor responses in both murine models of cancer and human malignancy. Under all of the circumstances tested in T cells obtained from either mice or humans, we observed that PECAM-1 enhanced the sensitivity of the T cells to TGF-β-mediated inhibition of activity. The extent to which memory cells in mice behave similarly to human memory T cells and whether loss of PECAM-1 renders memory T cells in either humans or mice more resistant to TGF-β is currently being explored in our laboratories. In the most proximal events of TGF-β signaling, TGF-β binds to TGF-βRI, which results in phosphorylation of TGF-βRII and the formation of a tetrameric complex consisting of two subunits each of TGF-βRI and TGF-βRII. Phosphorylation of this ITIM led to the recruitment of SHP-2, a phosphatase that antagonizes TCR signaling. Phosphorylation of this ITIM led to the recruitment of SHP-2, a phosphatase that antagonizes TCR signaling. Phosphorylation of this ITIM led to the recruitment of SHP-2, a phosphatase that antagonizes TCR signaling. Although these findings suggest that PECAM-1 ITIM phosphorylation and SHP-2 recruitment require TGF-βRI/II-mediated phosphorylation events, it is unlikely that the PECAM-1 ITIMs are directly phosphorylated by TGF-βRI/II. This prediction is consistent with our previous findings that, in resting cells, the C-terminal PECAM-1 ITIM is cryptic because of interactions with the plasma membrane that are relieved by the phosphorylation, in activated cells, of PECAM-1 on Ser702, thereby exposing Tyr686 for phosphorylation by Src family kinases (SFKs), which are activated upon TCR stimulation (15, 16). This prediction is consistent with our previous findings that, in resting cells, the C-terminal PECAM-1 ITIM is cryptic because of interactions with the plasma membrane that are relieved by the phosphorylation, in activated cells, of PECAM-1 on Ser702, thereby exposing Tyr686 for phosphorylation by Src family kinases (SFKs), which are activated upon TCR stimulation (15, 16). This prediction is consistent with our previous findings that, in resting cells, the C-terminal PECAM-1 ITIM is cryptic because of interactions with the plasma membrane that are relieved by the phosphorylation, in activated cells, of PECAM-1 on Ser702, thereby exposing Tyr686 for phosphorylation by Src family kinases (SFKs), which are activated upon TCR stimulation (15, 16). The two most membrane-distal Ig domains of PECAM-1 support homophilic interactions that facilitate maintenance of endothelial barrier integrity and leukocyte trans-endothelial migration (11). Phosphorylation of the cytoplasmic ITIMs of PECAM-1 depends upon a series of serine and threonine (S/T) and tyrosine (Y) phosphorylation events that support the recruitment and activation of tandem Src homology 2 (SH2) domain-containing phosphatases, such as SHP-2 (15, 16). Homozygosity for the disrupted PECAM1 allele was confirmed for all mice by performing a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay with tail DNA using a forward primer that hybridizes with a sequence within exon 7 (5′-CTGCCAGTCCGAAAATGGAAC-3′) and reverse primers that hybridize with either a sequence within the neomycin cassette (5′-TGCTCCTGCCGAGAAAGTATCC-3′), which amplifies a 626-bp band from the disrupted allele, or a sequence within intron 7 (5′-GGTCAAAAAGGGTTACAACGGC-3′), which amplifies a 387-bp band from the wild-type (WT) allele and a 1546-bp band from the disupted allele. Flow cytometry was used to measure the extent of CFSE dilution and intracellular staining of granzyme B with a phycoerythrin (PE)-conjugated anti-granzyme B antibody, clone GB11 (Invitrogen/Life Technologies). PECAM-1-deficient mice exhibit a hyper-inflammatory phenotype that, although milder than that associated with TGF-β deficiency, is nevertheless also a result of loss of the inhibitory action of PECAM-1 on T cell responsiveness (17). CD4+ T cells were isolated from MNCs with the Dynabeads CD4 Positive Isolation Kit (Invitrogen/Life Technologies), CD8+ T cells were isolated from CD4-depleted MNCs using Dynabeads Untouched Human CD8 T Cells Kit (Invitrogen/Life Technologies), and PECAM-1-positive and PECAM-1-negative T cells were separated from the purified CD4+ and CD8+ T cells using Dynabeads CD31 Endothelial Cell Kit (Invitrogen/Life Technologies). CD4+ T cells were isolated from MNCs with the Dynabeads CD4 Positive Isolation Kit (Invitrogen/Life Technologies), CD8+ T cells were isolated from CD4-depleted MNCs using Dynabeads Untouched Human CD8 T Cells Kit (Invitrogen/Life Technologies), and PECAM-1-positive and PECAM-1-negative T cells were separated from the purified CD4+ and CD8+ T cells using Dynabeads CD31 Endothelial Cell Kit (Invitrogen/Life Technologies). CD4+ T cells were isolated from MNCs with the Dynabeads CD4 Positive Isolation Kit (Invitrogen/Life Technologies), CD8+ T cells were isolated from CD4-depleted MNCs using Dynabeads Untouched Human CD8 T Cells Kit (Invitrogen/Life Technologies), and PECAM-1-positive and PECAM-1-negative T cells were separated from the purified CD4+ and CD8+ T cells using Dynabeads CD31 Endothelial Cell Kit (Invitrogen/Life Technologies). CD4+ T cells were isolated from MNCs with the Dynabeads CD4 Positive Isolation Kit (Invitrogen/Life Technologies), CD8+ T cells were isolated from CD4-depleted MNCs using Dynabeads Untouched Human CD8 T Cells Kit (Invitrogen/Life Technologies), and PECAM-1-positive and PECAM-1-negative T cells were separated from the purified CD4+ and CD8+ T cells using Dynabeads CD31 Endothelial Cell Kit (Invitrogen/Life Technologies). Flow cytometry was used to measure the extent of CFSE dilution and for intracellular staining of granzyme B as described earlier. Whether loss of the inhibitory effects of PECAM-1 can enhance the anti-tumor activity of T cells is not known. Whether loss of the inhibitory effects of PECAM-1 can enhance the anti-tumor activity of T cells is not known. Whether loss of the inhibitory effects of PECAM-1 can enhance the anti-tumor activity of T cells is not known. After 24 hours at 37°C, the medium was removed and replaced with viral supernatant (3.62 × 108 transduction units/ml) containing polybrene (Santa Cruz) at a final concentration of 4 μg/ml. Pre-cleared lysates were incubated with 0.2 to 2 μg of PECAM-1.2 or PECAM-1.3 mAb for 1 hour at 4°C followed by incubation with 20 μl of Protein A/G Plus-Agarose beads overnight at 4°C. Membranes were blocked in 3% non-fat milk and 1× Tris buffered saline, 0.1% Tween-20 (TBST) at room temperature for 1 hour, and incubated with primary antibodies in blocking buffer overnight at 4°C. Membranes were washed three times for 5 min each with 1× TBST, incubated with horse radish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibodies in blocking buffer for 1 hour at room temperature, and then washed three times for 10 min each with 1× TBST. After the blocking buffer was drained off the slides, 100 μl of appropriately diluted primary antibody (1:100 in 0.5% BSA in PBS) was added to slide sections and incubated in a humidified chamber at room temperature for 2 hours. The slides were rinsed twice in PBS, then incubated with 100 μl of diluted secondary antibody (1:200ul in PBS) in a humidified chamber at room temperature for 1 hour. Slides were rinsed twice in PBS before 100 μl of 28.6 μM of 4′,6-diamidino-2phenylindole dihydrochloride (DAPI, Sigma-Aldrich) in PBS was added to each well of the slides. The mounted samples were analyzed with an Olympus Multiphoton Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope (FV1000-MPE). In situ PLAThe in situ PLA (Olink) was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Human CD4+ T cells were treated as described earlier for immunofluorescent staining. Human CD4+ T cells were treated as described earlier for immunofluorescent staining. Human CD4+ T cells were treated as described earlier for immunofluorescent staining. The soaking buffer was removed, the slides were incubated with Duolink Ligase diluted in ligation buffer for 30 min at 37°C and then were washed three times with TBST. The mounted samples were analyzed with an Olympus Multiphoton Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope. The mounted samples were analyzed with an Olympus Multiphoton Laser Scanning Confocal Microscope. Multiple comparisons tests were only applied when a statistically significant difference was determined by ANOVA (P < 0.05). Multiple comparisons tests were only applied when a statistically significant difference was determined by ANOVA (P < 0.05). PECAM-1 is expressed on the surface of T cells purified from wild-type, but not PECAM-1−/−, mice. PECAM-1 is expressed on the surface of T cells purified from wild-type, but not PECAM-1−/−, mice. It has been most rigorously studied with a mouse model system involving subcutaneous inoculation with the murine lymphoma cell line EL4 or a derivative cell line EL4-ova, engineered to constitutively express the immunogenic protein ovalbumin (18). It has been most rigorously studied with a mouse model system involving subcutaneous inoculation with the murine lymphoma cell line EL4 or a derivative cell line EL4-ova, engineered to constitutively express the immunogenic protein ovalbumin (18). Because loss of PECAM-1 reduces the transendothelial migration of leukocytes (23), we also examined the number of tumor-infiltrating lymphoyctes (TILs) in the two strains of mice. Although immune checkpoint therapy has emerged as a potent means to enhance the anti-tumor responses of T cells, it elicits durable clinical responses in only a fraction of cancer patients. Also similar to mouse CD8+ T cells, lower concentrations of TGF-β were required to inhibit IFN-γ production (Fig. 3, E and F) were greater than those required to inhibit these functions in PECAM-1-positive cells. Secretion of large amounts of TGF-β helps tumors evade clearance by tumor-reactive T cells, and tumors that secrete large amounts of TGF-β have proven resistant to immune checkpoint therapy (7, 8). Furthermore, inhibitor-treated PECAM-1-positive and PECAM-1-negative T cells responded equivalently when stimulated with anti-CD3 in the presence of a high concentration of TGF-β (Fig. Together, the data suggest that in mice, TGF-β is required for PECAM-1 to suppress the responses of human T cells to TCR stimulation, and that PECAM-1 markedly enhances the sensitivity of human T cells to TGF-β.TGFβ signals both through canonical pathways that result from direct phosphorylation of effector Smad proteins by the TGFβ receptor, and through Smad-independent signals that vary by cell type (24). 