Given the inconsistent results of prior studies and paucity of pediatric data, the objective of this study was to determine the prevalence of autoantibody positivity in a multicenter cohort of children with overweight or obese BMI and biopsy-confirmed NAFLD, and to investigate associations with histologic disease severity. Severity of obesity was classified as overweight (BMI: 85th to <95th percentile for age and sex based on CDC growth charts), obese class I (BMI: 95th to <120% of the 95th percentile), obese class II (BMI: 120% to <140% of the 95th percentile), or obese class III (BMI ≥ 140% of the 95th percentile).13All three antibodies were measured by indirect immunofluorescence, using human Hep-2 cells for ANA, using the commercial test NOVA-LITE DAPI Hep-2 ANA, and mouse liver/kidney tissue for ASMA and anti-LKM. Diagnosis of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) at the time of liver biopsy was defined as hemoglobin A1C (HbA1c) >6.4%, oral glucose tolerance test with plasma glucose >200 mg/dL at 2 hours, or confirmation of T2DM diagnosis by an endocrinologist.Typical clinical indications for liver biopsy at our institutions include concerns for: (1) severe NAFLD, as evidenced by: (a) persistently (3-6 months) elevated ALT and/or lack of improvement in serum ALT levels after appropriate implementation of lifestyle changes with subsequent BMI z-score improvements; (b) cardiometabolic risk factors associated with more severe NAFLD, such as type 2 diabetes or OSA; (c) evidence of splenomegaly and/or increased liver stiffness on magnetic resonance elastography); or (2) concern for a secondary underlying liver disease (eg, AIH due to positive autoantibodies with elevated serum immunoglobulin G levels).The classification developed by the non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) Clinical Research Network was used to score severity of steatosis (scored 0-3), lobular inflammation (0-3), hepatocyte ballooning (0-2) and fibrosis (0-4), and the NAS was calculated (sum of scores for steatosis, lobular inflammation and ballooning; range 0-8).14 A NAS of ≥5 was used to distinguish those with mild vs severe liver disease during the analyses. Significant fibrosis in this pediatric cohort was defined as fibrosis at or above stage 2. 2.2| Statistical analysesDescriptive statistics (medians and interquartile ranges [IQRs] for continuous variables and frequencies and percentages for categorical variables) were used to present the demographics and clinical characteristics of the cohort. 2.2| Statistical analysesDescriptive statistics (medians and interquartile ranges [IQRs] for continuous variables and frequencies and percentages for categorical variables) were used to present the demographics and clinical characteristics of the cohort. Statistical analyses were performed using Stata MP v.14.2 (StataCorp, College Station, Texas). The distinct histological features and the overall liver disease severity were not different between patients with and without positive autoantibodies (Table 2, Figure 1), with the exception of patients with ANA positivity. The proportion of patients with moderate-to-severe steatosis (steatosis score ≥2) was significantly higher in those with positive ANA compared to those with negative ANA (90% vs 72%, respectively; P = .045). The proportion of patients with moderate-to-severe steatosis (steatosis score ≥2) was significantly higher in those with positive ANA compared to those with negative ANA (90% vs 72%, respectively; P = .045). Similar findings were observed in patients with or without ANA positivity (Table 3). Similar findings were observed in patients with or without ANA positivity (Table 3). Similar findings were observed in patients with or without ANA positivity (Table 3). Similar findings were observed in patients with or without ANA positivity (Table 3). Histologically, autoantibody positivity was not associated with liver disease severity, with the exception of the subgroup of patients with positive ANA who had increased steatosis severity independent of known confounders. Vuppalanchi et al studied the largest cohort of patients with histologically confirmed NAFLD (n = 864) and showed that those with positive autoantibodies were less likely to have a steatosis score of ≥2.10 As expected, the NAS was lower in those with positive autoantibodies as well. This finding suggests that either the proposed hypothesis by Loria et al is false, or that it does not apply to pediatric NAFLD. Lastly, the referral bias that exists in studies of patients with confirmed NAFLD may be different between adult and pediatric NAFLD cohorts, as different criteria and thresholds may exist to biopsy an adult vs a young child with presumed NAFLD.20 In our cohort, we had a lower proportion with high NAS score,12 as only 12% of our patients had a NAS 6-7 vs 24% in the study by Patton et al  The only other significant difference between the report by Patton et al  and our study was the lower prevalence of ASMA positivity, which may have contributed to a type II error and the differences in the results seen. Following exclusion of conditions such as viral hepatitis B or C infections, autoantibody positivity alone can be sufficient evidence for clinicians to proceed with a liver biopsy, considering that autoimmune hepatitis is the second most common diagnosis made in children with overweight or obese BMI and suspected NAFLD, and should not be missed.1 Conversely, in the absence of autoantibody positivity, at our institutions, patients undergo liver biopsies if there are concerns that they may have more severe NAFLD (steatohepatitis, advanced fibrosis), as suggested by the presence of multiple cardiometabolic risk factors (eg, dyslipidemia, T2DM etc. Of fundamental value is the multicenter nature of the study design, as with the reporting of data from multiple centers, the results are more generalizable to other pediatric centers. 