Detection of anti-BPDE–Catechin Complex by ESI/MS/MSThis analysis was performed to detect the reaction products in the reaction mixtures of anti-BPDE and test compounds (green tea catechins and hydrolyzable tannins). For example, a peak with a m/z ratio of 761 corresponding to anti-BPDE-EGCG complex was found in the anti-BPDE–EGCG reaction mixture; the MS/MS spectrum of the complex further suggested a direct covalent interaction of anti-BPDE and EGCG (data not shown). The peaks with retention times of 8.51, 9.56, 10.17, 11.30, 11.47, 11.66, and 11.96 all generated a fragmentation pattern in which a fragment with a m/z ratio of 591 and another fragment with a m/z ratio of 303 exist, suggesting that anti-BPDE attacks the hydroxyl groups on the B ring of EGCG molecules (Figure 6B). The peaks with retention times of 10.51 and 10.59 min generated a different fragmentation pattern in which a fragment with a m/z ratio of 455 and another fragment with a m/z ratio of 307 exist, suggesting that anti-BPDE attacks the hydroxyl groups on the D ring of EGCG molecules (Figure 6C). In this study, we demonstrate a clear correlation of adjacent aromatic hydroxyl groups in the molecular structure of green tea catechins and hydrolyzable tannins with the inhibitory effects of these compounds on DNA adduct formation induced by BP. With regards to the potency, the more functional hydroxyl groups in green tea catechins correspond to lower IC50 values. The molecular structures of green tea catechins and hydrolyzable tannins are quite different although some similarities exist, so the comparison of these two compounds may not be appropriate. The hydroxyl groups on either the B ring or the D ring of EGCG molecules (Figure 6B,C), but not both, were found to react with anti-BPDE, thus sequestering anti-BPDE. Our MS studies on the anti-BPDE–EGCG complex did not provide information on the exact position of the hydroxyl groups that react with anti-BPDE. This is probably because anti-BPDE has two optical enantiomers, and also, anti-BPDE can attack different positions on the B ring or D ring of EGCG molecules, which produce different complexes with different retention times as shown in our results. Many mechanisms of action of green tea catechins have been proposed based on studies in vitro. However, these mechanisms of action are more relevant to the chemotherapeutic effects of green tea catechins rather than their chemopreventive effects (31). However, these mechanisms of action are more relevant to the chemotherapeutic effects of green tea catechins rather than their chemopreventive effects (31). However, these mechanisms of action are more relevant to the chemotherapeutic effects of green tea catechins rather than their chemopreventive effects (31). However, these mechanisms of action are more relevant to the chemotherapeutic effects of green tea catechins rather than their chemopreventive effects (31). However, these mechanisms of action are more relevant to the chemotherapeutic effects of green tea catechins rather than their chemopreventive effects (31). However, these mechanisms of action are more relevant to the chemotherapeutic effects of green tea catechins rather than their chemopreventive effects (31). However, the mechanism behind these effects is not known. However, the mechanism behind these effects is not known. However, the mechanism behind these effects is not known. Back in the early 1980s, Conney and co-workers showed that the plant phenolic ellagic acid was highly potent in inhibiting the mutagenesis by anti-BPDE (34). Subsequently, this group demonstrated that this inhibition occurred due to covalent interaction of ellagic acid with anti-BPDE (35). Green tea extract, which contains several catechins with cis-diol groups, like in ellagic acid, was reported to decrease anti-BPDE-induced DNA strand breaks (37), presumably by the same mechanistic action of ellagic acid reported by Sayer et al  (35). Additionally, Bors and Michel (38) and Rice-Evans et al  (39) demonstrated that the cis-diol groups in green tea catechins could scavenge free radicals such as hydroxyl radicals, azide radicals, and superoxide anions, thus correlating with their antioxidant activities. We therefore used a microsomal system to assess the capacity of various catechins in green tea to inhibit DNA adduct formation and determine SAR. Two hydrolyzable tannins, pentagalloylglucose (5GG) and tannic acid (TA; penta-m-digalloyl-glucose), which have a higher number of cis-diols in their structures (Figure 1B) than the catechins, were also included to further test the SAR. st-DNA (300 μg/mL) was preincubated with 50 mM Tris-HCl (pH 7.5), 1 mM MgCl2, 2.5 mM glucose-6-phosphate, 1 U/mL G6PDH, 0.5 mM NADP+, and β-naphthoflavone-induced microsomal proteins (1 mg/mL) in 1 mL for 10 min, in the presence of vehicle alone or green tea catechins or hydrolyzable tannins (1–200 μM). Labeled DNA adducts were separated by multidirectional polyethyleneimine (PEI)-cellulose TLC in the following solvents: D1 = 1.0 M sodium phosphate, pH 6.0; D3 = 4 M lithium formate/7 M urea, pH 3.5; D4 = 4 M ammonium hydroxide/isopropanol (1.1:1); and D5 = 1.7 M sodium phosphate, pH 6.0. Labeled DNA adducts were separated by multidirectional polyethyleneimine (PEI)-cellulose TLC in the following solvents: D1 = 1.0 M sodium phosphate, pH 6.0; D3 = 4 M lithium formate/7 M urea, pH 3.5; D4 = 4 M ammonium hydroxide/isopropanol (1.1:1); and D5 = 1.7 M sodium phosphate, pH 6.0. Labeled DNA adducts were separated by multidirectional polyethyleneimine (PEI)-cellulose TLC in the following solvents: D1 = 1.0 M sodium phosphate, pH 6.0; D3 = 4 M lithium formate/7 M urea, pH 3.5; D4 = 4 M ammonium hydroxide/isopropanol (1.1:1); and D5 = 1.7 M sodium phosphate, pH 6.0. Labeled DNA adducts were separated by multidirectional polyethyleneimine (PEI)-cellulose TLC in the following solvents: D1 = 1.0 M sodium phosphate, pH 6.0; D3 = 4 M lithium formate/7 M urea, pH 3.5; D4 = 4 M ammonium hydroxide/isopropanol (1.1:1); and D5 = 1.7 M sodium phosphate, pH 6.0. Labeled DNA adducts were separated by multidirectional polyethyleneimine (PEI)-cellulose TLC in the following solvents: D1 = 1.0 M sodium phosphate, pH 6.0; D3 = 4 M lithium formate/7 M urea, pH 3.5; D4 = 4 M ammonium hydroxide/isopropanol (1.1:1); and D5 = 1.7 M sodium phosphate, pH 6.0. Normal nucleotides were resolved in 180 mM sodium phosphate, pH 6.0, by one-directional PEI-cellulose TLC. Normal nucleotides were resolved in 180 mM sodium phosphate, pH 6.0, by one-directional PEI-cellulose TLC. MS and MS/MS spectra were acquired in positive ion mode at 30000 mass resolution. Before we tested the efficacy of these various phenolic compounds, we first determined the lowest concentration of BP in a microsomal reaction that would produce measurable levels of DNA adducts detected by the highly sensitive 32P-postlabeling assay. 