Together, the observations in healthy individuals and CMC patients indicate that expression of IFIH1, and not expression of the other genes in the FAP-IFIH1-GCA-KCNH7 LD region, is specifically induced by stimulation with C. albicans but not by bacterial stimuli. This suggests that IFIH1 plays an important role in the antifungal host defense. IL-10, IFN-γ, and IL-17 levels produced by PBMCs were measured after stimulation with either C. albicans yeasts or hyphae. IL-10, IFN-γ, and IL-17 levels produced by PBMCs were measured after stimulation with either C. albicans yeasts or hyphae. IL-10, IFN-γ, and IL-17 levels produced by PBMCs were measured after stimulation with either C. albicans yeasts or hyphae. Thus, genetic variation in IFIH1 influences anti-Candida cytokine profiles in vitro. The equivalent loop is rigid in RIG-I, and this differential flexibility contributes to the different RNA binding preferences: displacement of the loop upon dsRNA binding allows MDA5 to recognizes long dsRNA, while the loop in RIG-I specifically caps shorter dsRNA [24]. The equivalent loop is rigid in RIG-I, and this differential flexibility contributes to the different RNA binding preferences: displacement of the loop upon dsRNA binding allows MDA5 to recognizes long dsRNA, while the loop in RIG-I specifically caps shorter dsRNA [24]. The equivalent loop is rigid in RIG-I, and this differential flexibility contributes to the different RNA binding preferences: displacement of the loop upon dsRNA binding allows MDA5 to recognizes long dsRNA, while the loop in RIG-I specifically caps shorter dsRNA [24]. Thus, the Ala946Thr and His843Arg substitutions could alter dsRNA binding selectivity and affinity, and the latter might also affect signaling activity. Similarly, the IL-6 and IL-10 cytokine responses were also lower under Candida stimulation of cells from Mda5 knockout mice, and these differences were more pronounced when cells were stimulated with hyphae compared to the yeast form (Figure S6). RNA binding causes MDA5 to interact with MAVS in a CARD-dependent manner, leading to downstream signaling and subsequent activation of transcription factors such as IRF3, IRF7, and NF-κB. We therefore aimed to identify the mechanisms through which human macrophages respond specifically to the germination process. Additional evidence that MDA5 is indeed important for human antifungal defense was provided by the assessment of genetic variation predisposing to candidemia. While genetic variation in IFIH1 has previously been shown to influence susceptibility to several autoimmune diseases such as type I diabetes, Graves’ disease, and multiple sclerosis [18-20, 27-32], this is the first report of polymorphisms in IFIH1 linked to a fungal infection. MDA5 activates the RLR pathway leading to the production of type I interferons during viral infections [26]. A recent study showed that rare IFIH1 variants causing the type I interferon-mediated pathology of the Aicardi-Goutières syndrome are gain of function mutations that lead to stronger RNA binding, and thereby increase baseline and RNA-induced IFN signaling [41]. This is the first time that a receptor of the RIG-I-like helicase family has been shown to be involved in the antifungal immune response. 200000 monocytes per well remained unstimulated or were stimulated for 4 or 24 hours with either wild-type C. albicans (UC820) or a HGC1 null mutant, which is unable to form hyphae. stimulation with wild-type or HGC1 null Candida, for 4h or 24h, compared to unstimulated control). stimulation with wild-type or HGC1 null Candida, for 4h or 24h, compared to unstimulated control). The study was approved by the Institutional Review Boards of both medical centres, the Institutional Review Board of Duke University (CR4_Pro00006427) in North Carolina (USA) and the ‘Commissie Mensgebonden Onderzoek Arnhem-Nijmegen’ (2001/198) in Nijmegen (The Netherlands). Controls were recruited consecutively from the same hospital wards/services as infected patients during the study period, with a similar balance of medical, surgical, and oncology patients in case and control groups. We applied quality control filters to exclude SNPs with: (i) a genotype call rate of less than 90%, (ii) strong deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in control samples (Hardy-Weinberg exact test P ≤ 1 × 10−3), and (iii) significant differences in missingness between cases and controls (Fisher's exact P < 1 × 10−2). As our cohort does not have the power to detect associations with rare variants, we only included SNPs with a minor allele frequency (MAF) of greater than 5% in cases and controls together. Genetic analysesLinkage disequilibrium (LD) measures were calculated using Haploview version 4.2 [51] for both the candidemia cohort (LD patterns are based on genotypes of control individuals only) and common SNPs (MAF > 5%) in the CEU population (Utah Residents (CEPH) with Northern and Western European ancestry) in HapMap 3, release 2 [52]. Genotypic association was calculated using the Fisher's exact test, asking whether candidemia cases and controls have significantly different genotype count distributions (H0: genotype counts are the same). Similarly, allelic association was calculated using the Fisher's exact test, asking whether candidemia cases and controls have significantly different allele count distributions (H0: allele counts are the same). Regional association plots were created using code adapted from http://www.broadinstitute.org/diabetes/scandinavs/figures.html. Regional association plots were created using code adapted from http://www.broadinstitute.org/diabetes/scandinavs/figures.html. 0.5 × 106 isolated PBMCs remained unstimulated (RPMI), or were stimulated with either 1 × 106/ml heat killed Borrelia burgdorferi [54], 1 × 106/ml heat killed Candida albicans (UC820) [55], 10 ng/ml Escherichia coli-derived lipopolysaccharide (LPS), or 1 × 107/ml sonicated Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) (Hv37Rv) for either 4 or 24 hours. 0.5 × 106 cells were plated in 96 wells round bottom plates and subsequently stimulated with either heat killed C. albicans yeast or hyphae (both UC820, 1 × 106/ml, heat-killed at 100°C for 1 hour) for 24 hours (IL-10) or 7 days (IL-17 and IFN-γ). 0.5 × 106 cells were plated in 96 wells round bottom plates and subsequently stimulated with either heat killed C. albicans yeast or hyphae (both UC820, 1 × 106/ml, heat-killed at 100°C for 1 hour) for 24 hours (IL-10) or 7 days (IL-17 and IFN-γ). 0.5 × 106 cells were plated in 96 wells round bottom plates and subsequently stimulated with either heat killed C. albicans yeast or hyphae (both UC820, 1 × 106/ml, heat-killed at 100°C for 1 hour) for 24 hours (IL-10) or 7 days (IL-17 and IFN-γ). Mda5 knockout mice studiesMda5−/− mice on C57BL/6J background that have been backcrossed at least ten times (kindly provided by dr. M. Colonna) were housed in the facilities of the University Hospital Bonn, Germany. RNA was isolated according to the TRIzol® isolation protocol supplied by the manufacturer (Life Technologies). RNA was isolated according to the TRIzol® isolation protocol supplied by the manufacturer (Life Technologies). RNA was isolated according to the TRIzol® isolation protocol supplied by the manufacturer (Life Technologies). Candida germination induces expression of RLR pathway components in macrophagesCandida albicans is a dimorphic fungus that exists either in a colonizing yeast form, or as an invasive filamentous form (hyphae). To this end, we profiled gene expression in macrophages stimulated with wild-type and HGC1 null (yeast-locked) strains of C. albicans for either 4 or 24 hours, the latter time point being required for fungal germination into hyphae (Figure 1). We identified 62 genes exhibiting significant differential expression specifically in macrophages stimulated with Candida hyphae for 24h, but not for 4h, nor in macrophages stimulated with yeast-locked Candida (Benjamini-Hochberg (BH)-corrected P < 0.05 and > 2-fold change in expression, compared to unstimulated macrophages, Figure 1A). IFIH1 (interferon induced with helicase C domain 1), with its protein product known as MDA5 (melanoma differentiation-associated protein 5), is a receptor of long double-stranded RNA (dsRNA), which constitutes one branch of the RLR pathway (Figure 1B). ISG15 and TRIM25 are involved in the RIG-I branch of that pathway, which is activated by shorter, 5’ triphosphate-containing dsRNA. Thus, the invasive form of Candida induces expression of components of two branches of the virus-recognition RLR pathway in macrophages. Thus, the invasive form of Candida induces expression of components of two branches of the virus-recognition RLR pathway in macrophages. Thus, the invasive form of Candida induces expression of components of two branches of the virus-recognition RLR pathway in macrophages. Thus, the invasive form of Candida induces expression of components of two branches of the virus-recognition RLR pathway in macrophages. Thus, the invasive form of Candida induces expression of components of two branches of the virus-recognition RLR pathway in macrophages. We checked for the presence of SNPs associated with the four RLR pathway components on the array and tested the loci for association with candidemia. We checked for the presence of SNPs associated with the four RLR pathway components on the array and tested the loci for association with candidemia. We checked for the presence of SNPs associated with the four RLR pathway components on the array and tested the loci for association with candidemia. ISG15 and TRIM25 were not covered, and genetic variation linked to IL8 did not reveal any association.In contrast, analysis of 64 SNPs associated with IFIH1 revealed strong allelic and genotypic association with susceptibility to candidemia (Figure 2A and Table 2). 