Some research has shed light on these perplexing opposite effects of the policy by gender. Some research has shed light on these perplexing opposite effects of the policy by gender. Policy Translation of Affordable Housing Subsidies In the United Kingdom (UK), two affordable housing policies, each targeted at low-income households, are in great demand: (1) social rent housing, which is a place-based affordable housing policy, and (2) housing benefits, which are (people-based) government subsidies provided within the social security system to qualified low-income households to offset housing costs. Therefore, residual confounding by baseline socioeconomic position (namely income, but also unemployment or other measures of disadvantage) looms as a core limitation of interpreting the social rent coefficient in Flouri’s models as causal. Such evidence aligns with a body of research on the income gradient in child development. in terms of form or dose, and this assumption may be violated in observational studies [7]. Policies can manipulate many different exposures, which may all be conflated in an observational study, and some of these exposures could inform policy. Ultimately, a key goal for translation is to determine which elements of housing subsidies are causal for health, and which are simply correlates, given the clustering of disadvantage. Ultimately, a key goal for translation is to determine which elements of housing subsidies are causal for health, and which are simply correlates, given the clustering of disadvantage. Ultimately, a key goal for translation is to determine which elements of housing subsidies are causal for health, and which are simply correlates, given the clustering of disadvantage. For policy translation, it may not be relevant whether the causal effect is present among all populations, particularly if the policy is not a universal one; it is more relevant whether the causal effect is present among the subpopulation eligible for the policy. But those living outside social rent are not a true counterfactual to those in social rent, including primarily because many are not income-eligible for the policy. Opportunity mapping is one technique to characterize neighborhoods via compilation measures, derived from multiple quality of life dimensions, to identify access to opportunity rich residential areas. An important goal of urban planners is to create neighborhoods that attract residents, in other words, to encourage self-selection [10]. Yet the problem remains that selection is nonrandom, but strongly patterned by race/ethnicity and socioeconomic position. in the housing or community development sector) can be manipulated, to change fundamental causes of mental health related to housing and neighborhood. Even studies explicitly testing the effects of social or economic policies cannot guide us much because until recently, few policies have considered health in their logic models or as outcomes [3]. Even studies explicitly testing the effects of social or economic policies cannot guide us much because until recently, few policies have considered health in their logic models or as outcomes [3]. 