Speech was transduced with a Sennheiser K6 microphone and recorded on a DAT recorder. The recordings were transferred digitally to a PC for the perceptual tests.ListenersEight listeners were recruited, four male and four female, aged between 18 and 25 (mean age 20.3 years). The listeners could hear the texts as often as they desired and they were self-paced to avoid fatigue. The main effect of accent retention was also significant (F(1,56) = 113.983, p <.001), indicating that overall, speakers who self-reported as having lost their accent were indeed rated as more similar to HC speakers than were speakers who retained their accent. The main effect of accent retention was also significant (F(1,56) = 113.983, p <.001), indicating that overall, speakers who self-reported as having lost their accent were indeed rated as more similar to HC speakers than were speakers who retained their accent. The main effect of accent retention was also significant (F(1,56) = 113.983, p <.001), indicating that overall, speakers who self-reported as having lost their accent were indeed rated as more similar to HC speakers than were speakers who retained their accent. The main effect of accent retention was also significant (F(1,56) = 113.983, p <.001), indicating that overall, speakers who self-reported as having lost their accent were indeed rated as more similar to HC speakers than were speakers who retained their accent. To summarize, speakers' judgments about whether or not they had lost their regional accents were largely reflected in the average similarity judgments.DiscussionThe results of the ANOVA and the similarity dendrogram obtained from the hierarchical clustering analysis indicate that HC English speakers separate from other accent groups. A speaker who was born, brought up and remains in a local language region almost always has the accent of the area of his or her own part of the country. This variable phonetic quality of the /æ/ words is, however, not captured in our features which represent the categorical presence or lack of a difference between word pairs like LASS and GLASS. Experiment two Experiment two Experiment two A Sennheiser K6 microphone was used to record vocal responses directly onto a DAT recorder for use in the analysis, as in normal-listening conditions. The output of an additional Sennheiser K6 microphone was relayed via a Quad microphone amplifier to the Digitech model studio 400 - signal processor to produce the required signal alteration. The output of an additional Sennheiser K6 microphone was relayed via a Quad microphone amplifier to the Digitech model studio 400 - signal processor to produce the required signal alteration. The output of an additional Sennheiser K6 microphone was relayed via a Quad microphone amplifier to the Digitech model studio 400 - signal processor to produce the required signal alteration. But it is common to observe that speakers who have left the region in which they grew up and acquired another accent as adults revert to their original accent when that accent is being spoken around them. But it is common to observe that speakers who have left the region in which they grew up and acquired another accent as adults revert to their original accent when that accent is being spoken around them. This is necessary to ensure that any accent group differences are not due to the different composition of the items in the present experiment.ResultsFirst, as in Experiment 1, inter-rater reliability was assessed for each of the four groups of listeners in order to ensure the extent to which idiosyncratic variation among speakers affected ratings of accent similarity. Average similarity ratings for pairings in the different feedback conditions were combined across the four listener groups, and assessed as in Experiment one (see Table 5).For the normal feedback conditions, as in Experiment 1, the HC speakers were rated as extremely similar (M=1.11); An ANOVA contrasting accent group and loss/retention of HC again revealed a strong effect of accent loss/retention under normal feedback conditions (F(3,128) = 333, p < .001). These results demonstrate that speakers with accent loss were indeed perceived as more like the HC speakers than those speakers who retained their accent, despite the possible differences due to the variation in rating contexts between Experiments 1 and 2.Analyses were then conducted to investigate ratings in the altered feedback conditions. If speakers show signs of their lost accents under altered feedback conditions, this should be revealed as less similarity to HC English speakers (as illustrated above), coupled with greater similarity to the speaker who has retained his/her accent. Under normal listening conditions, the similarity rating between speakers who had lost their accent and those who had retained their accent did not differ from the rating between speakers who had lost their accent and HC English speakers, illustrating that these speakers still retained some aspects of their original accents. These figures clearly indicate that with only a single exception (one lost-accent Northern Irish speaker in the DAF condition, NI- in the left panel of Figure 3), the speakers who had lost their accents now exhibited extremely strong tendencies to cluster with the accented speakers, rather than those from the HC English group under conditions of altered feedback. Since these effects applied as much to the HC English speakers as to the other regional speakers, it must be concluded that the judgements were based primarily on the segmental changes.The literature on foreign language learning suggests that 1) there are only weak effects of length of residence on pronunciation proficiency, but that 2) first language accent retention tends to be stronger in older than in younger second language learners. The data available from experiment two were the similarity rating for normal feedback, DAF and FSF (the last two allow examination of what age factors relate to degree of accent change under altered feedback conditions).Consistent with observation 1), the length of time spent in London did not correlate significantly with similarity ratings to HC for any of the listening conditions. Table 1 shows that speakers who lost their accent were younger on average when they came to London than speakers who retained their accent. Table 1 shows that speakers who lost their accent were younger on average when they came to London than speakers who retained their accent. Table 1 shows that speakers who lost their accent were younger on average when they came to London than speakers who retained their accent. Table 1 shows that speakers who lost their accent were younger on average when they came to London than speakers who retained their accent. Table 1 shows that speakers who lost their accent were younger on average when they came to London than speakers who retained their accent. The speakers who had lost their accent shifted position under each of the altered listening conditions (DAF and FSF) so that they were now rated as much more similar to the speakers who retained the same original accent. Experiment two showed that the speakers who had lost their original regional accent were rated closer to speakers who retained the same regional accent when they were speaking with DAF or FSF. Experiment two showed that the speakers who had lost their original regional accent were rated closer to speakers who retained the same regional accent when they were speaking with DAF or FSF. Experiment two showed that the speakers who had lost their original regional accent were rated closer to speakers who retained the same regional accent when they were speaking with DAF or FSF. Experiment two showed that the speakers who had lost their original regional accent were rated closer to speakers who retained the same regional accent when they were speaking with DAF or FSF. Experiment two showed that the speakers who had lost their original regional accent were rated closer to speakers who retained the same regional accent when they were speaking with DAF or FSF. Experiment two showed that the speakers who had lost their original regional accent were rated closer to speakers who retained the same regional accent when they were speaking with DAF or FSF. Experiment two showed that the speakers who had lost their original regional accent were rated closer to speakers who retained the same regional accent when they were speaking with DAF or FSF. In the light of this evidence it would appear surprising that speakers change their accent by generating new articulatory patterns in the short term as a result of modified auditory feedback.The fact that speakers can change their accent long term (experiment one) but that an accent closer to their original accent can be elicited over the short term (experiment two) implies that the alternative accent forms are available to speakers who have changed their accent. Telephones make such alterations to the voice (as well as change in its intensity). This seems to parallel the findings in second and foreign-language learning research, which demonstrate the more native-like pronunciation in the foreign language and the greater resistance to interference from L1 of those learners who were exposed to and learned the foreign language at a younger age (cf., for example Olson, & Samuels, 1973, and Flege, 1999, for an overview). This seems to parallel the findings in second and foreign-language learning research, which demonstrate the more native-like pronunciation in the foreign language and the greater resistance to interference from L1 of those learners who were exposed to and learned the foreign language at a younger age (cf., for example Olson, & Samuels, 1973, and Flege, 1999, for an overview). However, the apparently more robust evidence from foreign-language acquisition may also not be understood as a hard and fast rule. Howell and Dworzynski (2001) investigated whether delayed auditory feedback (DAF) and frequency shifted feedback (FSF) elicited an accented form of English in speakers who had an original language other than English (German speakers speaking English). Howell and Dworzynski (2001) investigated whether delayed auditory feedback (DAF) and frequency shifted feedback (FSF) elicited an accented form of English in speakers who had an original language other than English (German speakers speaking English). Howell and Dworzynski (2001) investigated whether delayed auditory feedback (DAF) and frequency shifted feedback (FSF) elicited an accented form of English in speakers who had an original language other than English (German speakers speaking English). Howell and Dworzynski (2001) investigated whether delayed auditory feedback (DAF) and frequency shifted feedback (FSF) elicited an accented form of English in speakers who had an original language other than English (German speakers speaking English). Howell and Dworzynski (2001) investigated whether delayed auditory feedback (DAF) and frequency shifted feedback (FSF) elicited an accented form of English in speakers who had an original language other than English (German speakers speaking English). The experiments reported in this article address two questions about accent change: 1) Is the adopted accent of speakers living in London, and who consider that they have lost their original accent, judged to be closer to HC English than the accent of speakers who claim to have retained their accent? The texts exploit the potential differences between dialects discussed above, namely either differences in phonemic oppositions, in the lexical incidence of phonemes or in the phonetic realisation of phonemes. If the prediction of the experiment is upheld, the speakers who have lost their original accent should lie closer to HC English speakers than those speakers who retain their accent, demonstrated by a strong main effect of accent loss/retention in the ANOVA, and illustrated by the clustering performance of individual speakers. We are using it in this sense in as much as we refer to regional pronunciations as accented in contrast to a Home Counties (HC) pronunciation. In all cases, number of years in London was contiguous and in the period immediately prior to when the recordings were made. The exception is where periods were spent away from London for purposes of study at provincial universities (i.e., universities outside London). Longer amounts of time spent in London does not necessarily lead speakers to lose their accent (for example, the third Liverpool speaker has spent 34 years in London but retains his accent).MaterialsTwo texts were generated which contained words with consonants and vowels whose phonemic function and/or phonetic realisation potentially distinguish the regional accents of the speakers from one another and from HC English.The design constraints on the texts can be illustrated by the following simplified example (Table 2) with three accent regions (Home Counties, Newcastle and Liverpool). First, there are prosodic and segmental differences, the former referring to lexical or phrasal stressing or accentuation patterns and intonation, the latter referring to the realization of consonants and vowels1. In this example, it is assumed that HC English manifests one feature which Newcastle and Liverpool do not and which distinguishes it from them when it occurs in the text. In this example, it is assumed that HC English manifests one feature which Newcastle and Liverpool do not and which distinguishes it from them when it occurs in the text. In this example, it is assumed that HC English manifests one feature which Newcastle and Liverpool do not and which distinguishes it from them when it occurs in the text. In this example, it is assumed that HC English manifests one feature which Newcastle and Liverpool do not and which distinguishes it from them when it occurs in the text. This leads to a third assumption, namely that the presence or absence of a feature is a defining property of an accent. Second, there are phonological versus phonetic differences, the former involving differences in the sound systems such as missing or additional sound oppositions (such as the absence of a difference between “fair” and “fur” in Liverpool English), the latter involving the way the properties are realized within the same framework of oppositions (e.g., northern [α=⌉] vs. a more upper class [A±⌉] for /A⌉/). 