Densitometric analysis of A11 immunoreactive oligomer specific bands was performed with NIH ImageJ version 1.34 software. One of the most potent methods to stimulate the innate immune system is via the Toll-like receptors (TLRs). The latter test was included to verify that performance on cognitive tests was not influenced by locomotor abnormalities. 3 E) and 59% (p = 0.002) reduction in hippocampal amyloid burden (Fig. 3 E) and 59% (p = 0.002) reduction in hippocampal amyloid burden (Fig. 3 E) and 59% (p = 0.002) reduction in hippocampal amyloid burden (Fig. A 78% reduction of the total fibrillar amyloid burden was observed in the hippocampus (two-tailed t test, p < 0.0001). A 78% reduction of the total fibrillar amyloid burden was observed in the hippocampus (two-tailed t test, p < 0.0001). A 78% reduction of the total fibrillar amyloid burden was observed in the hippocampus (two-tailed t test, p < 0.0001). A 78% reduction of the total fibrillar amyloid burden was observed in the hippocampus (two-tailed t test, p < 0.0001). There are 13 distinct TLR family members currently known in mammals, of which the pathogen specificities of 10 (TLR1-9 and 11) have been identified (Crack and Bray, 2007). Subsequent immunohistochemical staining for the adhesion receptor CD11b, a well established microglial and mononuclear phagocyte marker was performed. Although CD11b microglial expression was also found in our non-Tg animals, the staining intensity of CD11b marker was very low (data not shown). In addition, we confirmed the CD11b immunohistochemistry results by staining the brains with another commonly used microglial and macrophage marker CD45, which is typically expressed in association with more mature plaques (Morgan et al , 2005). 10).In evaluating the efficacy of CpG ODN administration in AD mice model, we found that stimulation of TLR9 signaling led to a remarkable reduction of amyloid burden which was paralleled by a reduction in the numbers of activated microglia and astrocytes.Furthermore, since antigen presenting cells including microglia are activated by TLR ligands, humoral immunity to Aβ may be induced. To determine whether the CpG ODN amyloid removal effect correlated with the production of antibody, the autoantibody response toward Aβ40 and Aβ42 was assessed periodically. The phase II of trial was prematurely terminated when 6% of vaccinated patients manifested symptoms of acute meningoencephalitis (Wisniewski and Konietzko, 2008). We postulated stimulation of the innate immune system as a possible alternative method for modulating amyloid-related pathology, without associated toxicity. Our prior work in prion disease, suggested this could be accomplished through TLR9 activation (Spinner et al , 2007), which induces both innate and adaptive immunity. Our prior work in prion disease, suggested this could be accomplished through TLR9 activation (Spinner et al , 2007), which induces both innate and adaptive immunity. Our results indicate that stimulation of TLR9 by CpG ODNs dramatically reduces amyloid burden in a mouse model of AD. There was a 66% reduction in cortical amyloid burden and a 59% reduction in hippocampal amyloid burden. In the behavioral studies, we verified that any differences between the groups are not attributable to differences in locomotor activity. Behavioral improvements are likely related to reduction in 56 kDa Aβ oligomers, which are linked more closely to functional deficits in AD model mice than fibrillar Aβ deposits (Cleary et al , 2005). Our analysis of brain microglia reactivity shows a marked reduction in both the cortex and hippocampus, as assessed by CD11b and CD45 immunoreactivity, reflecting the overall reduction of the amyloid burden in the CpG ODN-treated mice. In addition, as assessed by GFAP immunoreactivity, CNS astrocytosis was also markedly reduced. In addition, as assessed by GFAP immunoreactivity, CNS astrocytosis was also markedly reduced. Several reports have shown an increase in microhemorrhages in different AD mouse models following passive intraperitoneal immunization with various monoclonal antibodies having high affinities for Aβ plaques and CAA (Pfeifer et al , 2002; Wilcock et al , 2004; Racke et al , 2005). In one of these cases numerous cortical bleeds, which are typically rare in AD patients, were evident suggesting that these may have been related to the immunization (Ferrer et al , 2004). In one of these cases numerous cortical bleeds, which are typically rare in AD patients, were evident suggesting that these may have been related to the immunization (Ferrer et al , 2004). Furthermore, CAA is present in ∼33% of cognitively normal elderly populations (Zhang-Nunes et al , 2006). Furthermore, CAA is present in ∼33% of cognitively normal elderly populations (Zhang-Nunes et al , 2006). In humans, CpG ODNs administered peripherally, but not intravenously, are known to distribute throughout tissues that include mainly liver, kidneys and spleen (Krieg, 2006). At later stages of AD, when penetration of CpG ODNs into the CNS may be possible, microglia may be a direct target of the treatment. Such mechanisms appear to involve induction of both phagocytic activation and enhanced antigen presentation (Majumdar et al , 2007). Such mechanisms appear to involve induction of both phagocytic activation and enhanced antigen presentation (Majumdar et al , 2007). Accordingly, a single intracranial administration of the TLR4 ligand lipopolysaccharide (LPS) in AD model Tg2576 mice significantly reduces Aβ deposition within 7 d, an effect requiring microglial activation (Herber et al , 2007). These findings contrast to ours in which peripheral administration of CpG ODNs is clearly beneficial leading to reductions in both amyloid deposition and cognitive decline. Differences between the effects of peripheral LPS and CpG ODNs may be reconciled by the fact that these two TLR agonists trigger different signaling pathways, leading to different cytokine and gene activation profiles (Gao et al , 2002). Our results indicate that stimulation of the innate immune system through TLR9 with CpG ODNs is an effective and apparently nontoxic method to reduce the amyloid burden in AD model mice. Significantly, use of CpG ODNs has been shown to be safe in normal human volunteers (Vicari et al , 2007). Twenty age-matched vehicle-treated Tg mice and 25 non-Tg age-matched littermates were used as controls.Locomotor activityA Hamilton-Kinder Smart-Frame Photobeam System was used to make a computerized recording of animal activity over a designated period of time, as we have previously described (Sigurdsson et al , 2004; Sadowski et al , 2006; Scholtzova et al , 2008). Exploratory locomotor activity was recorded in a circular open field activity chamber measuring (70 × 70 cm). Exploratory locomotor activity was recorded in a circular open field activity chamber measuring (70 × 70 cm). Exploratory locomotor activity was recorded in a circular open field activity chamber measuring (70 × 70 cm). A video camera mounted above the chamber automatically recorded horizontal movements in the open field in each dimension (i.e., x, y, and two z planes). A video camera mounted above the chamber automatically recorded horizontal movements in the open field in each dimension (i.e., x, y, and two z planes). A video camera mounted above the chamber automatically recorded horizontal movements in the open field in each dimension (i.e., x, y, and two z planes). Results are reported based on distance traveled (cm), mean resting time, and velocity (average and maximum) of the animal.Radial arm mazeSpatial learning (working memory) was evaluated using an eight-arm radial maze with a water well at the end of each arm, as we have previously reported (Sigurdsson et al , 2004; Asuni et al , 2006; Sadowski et al , 2006;). Clear Plexiglas guillotine doors, operated by a remote pulley system, controlled access to the arms from a central area from which the animals entered and exited the apparatus. Aβ autoantibody responseThe autoantibody levels were determined at 1:200 dilutions of plasma using ELISA as described previously (Sigurdsson et al , 2004; Asuni et al , 2006; Sadowski et al , 2006) in which 0.5 μg per well of the Aβ40 or Aβ42 peptide was coated onto microtiter wells (Immulon 2HB; Thermo Electron Corporation). GFAP is a component of the glial intermediate filaments that forms part of the cytoskeleton and is found predominantly in astrocytes. The remaining series were placed in ethylene glycol cryoprotectant (30% sucrose/30% ethylene glycol in 0.1 mol/L phosphate buffer) and stored at -20°C until used. The remaining series were placed in ethylene glycol cryoprotectant (30% sucrose/30% ethylene glycol in 0.1 mol/L phosphate buffer) and stored at -20°C until used. The remaining series were placed in ethylene glycol cryoprotectant (30% sucrose/30% ethylene glycol in 0.1 mol/L phosphate buffer) and stored at -20°C until used. The remaining series were placed in ethylene glycol cryoprotectant (30% sucrose/30% ethylene glycol in 0.1 mol/L phosphate buffer) and stored at -20°C until used. Selected series were double-stained for Thioflavin-S and CD45. Thioflavin-S staining was performed on mounted sections, as published previously (Sadowski et al , 2006). Thioflavin-S staining was performed on mounted sections, as published previously (Sadowski et al , 2006). Equally spaced sections were mounted and stained in a solution containing 10% potassium ferrocyanide and 20% hydrochloric acid for 45 min. Equally spaced sections were mounted and stained in a solution containing 10% potassium ferrocyanide and 20% hydrochloric acid for 45 min. Seven sections were analyzed per animal. All procedures were performed by an individual blinded to the experimental condition of the study. The cortical area was dorsomedial from the cingulate cortex and extended ventrolaterally to the rhinal fissure within the right hemisphere. The adaptive immune response, which takes time to specifically target a foreign protein and provides a memory response upon subsequent re-exposure, is mediated by the more recently evolved T and B cells. Similarly for extraction of the total Aβ, homogenates (200 μl) were added to 440 μl of cold formic acid (FA) and sonicated for 1 min on ice. Western blot analysis of Aβ oligomersFor Western immunoblot analysis, 10% (w/v) brain homogenates were centrifuged at 25,000 × g for 10 min at 4°C, and the supernatants were transferred to clean tubes and stored as previously described (Sadowski et al , 2006). 