Despite this similar biochemical effect, psychostimulants and antipsychotics have opposing behavioral and clinical outcomes. 5a).Haloperidol is a typical antipsychotic known to be a strong antagonist of D2 receptors18. 5c).Clozapine is an example of an atypical antipsychotic drug which exhibits less activity at D2 receptors and greater binding of other neuromodulatory receptors such as serotonin receptors18. 5c).Clozapine is an example of an atypical antipsychotic drug which exhibits less activity at D2 receptors and greater binding of other neuromodulatory receptors such as serotonin receptors18. 5d) most likely reflecting the broader spectrum of receptors targeted directly by clozapine18. Additionally, we found that while D1 and D2 receptor agonists selectively target striatonigral or striatopallidal neurons in striatal slices, administration of either of these drugs in vivo affected DARPP-32 phosphorylation in both cell populations. The importance of studying cell-type specific responses in the striatum is exemplified by our results with cocaine which provide experimental support for the classical model of the basal ganglia. It was previously shown that acute cocaine caused an increase in DARPP-32 T34 phosphorylation and a decrease in T75 phosphorylation, a pattern associated with an increase in excitability in striatal neurons3, 23. It was previously shown that acute cocaine caused an increase in DARPP-32 T34 phosphorylation and a decrease in T75 phosphorylation, a pattern associated with an increase in excitability in striatal neurons3, 23. This differential regulation of signaling in striatonigral and striatopallidal neurons shows how cocaine, a dopamine potentiator, can modulate signaling in both circuits in ways expected to result in a cooperative effect on the basal ganglia's control of locomotor behavior. This differential regulation of signaling in striatonigral and striatopallidal neurons shows how cocaine, a dopamine potentiator, can modulate signaling in both circuits in ways expected to result in a cooperative effect on the basal ganglia's control of locomotor behavior. This differential regulation of signaling in striatonigral and striatopallidal neurons shows how cocaine, a dopamine potentiator, can modulate signaling in both circuits in ways expected to result in a cooperative effect on the basal ganglia's control of locomotor behavior. This differential regulation of signaling in striatonigral and striatopallidal neurons shows how cocaine, a dopamine potentiator, can modulate signaling in both circuits in ways expected to result in a cooperative effect on the basal ganglia's control of locomotor behavior. In contrast to cocaine, the typical antipsychotic haloperidol can cause behavioral sedation and catalepsy18. This could account for the observed increase in T34 phosphorylation in D2R neurons. Since T34 and T75 oppositely regulate the function of DARPP-32, namely inhibition of PP-1 or PKA, respectively2, the differential regulation of these sites by haloperidol and caffeine suggests a biochemical mechanism for the drugs’ opposing behavioral effects. Based on the classical model of the basal ganglia, activation of the direct pathway is expected to facilitate locomotor behavior13. Based on the classical model of the basal ganglia, activation of the direct pathway is expected to facilitate locomotor behavior13. The regulation of T34 phosphorylation in D2R neurons may represent a common mechanism of action of antipsychotics. The more limited increase in T34 phosphorylation balanced by increases in T75 seen with clozapine likely reflects this drug's ability to target several different pathways. The more limited increase in T34 phosphorylation balanced by increases in T75 seen with clozapine likely reflects this drug's ability to target several different pathways. The more limited increase in T34 phosphorylation balanced by increases in T75 seen with clozapine likely reflects this drug's ability to target several different pathways. Although dopaminergic terminals are severed in striatal slices decreasing overall dopaminergic tone, it is likely that stimulation of some pre-syanptic receptors by quinpirole further reduces dopamine release resulting in the small effect on T75 phosphorylation observed in D1R neurons in striatal slices. Regarding extra-striatal D1 receptors, it is known that they are expressed in the cortex and limbic regions which send glutamatergic projections to the striatum27, 28. For many of these drugs it is not known whether they differentially affect signaling in striatonigral or striatopallidal neurons. In principle, this methodology can be applied to study any type of post-translational modification on any protein in any cell type of interest. Generation of tagged DARPP-32 BAC transgenic miceAll animal protocols were performed in accordance with National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and were approved by the Rockefeller University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.D1R-DARPP-32/Flag and D2R-DARPP-32/Myc BAC mice were generated according to the GENSAT bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) modification protocol35. BAC DNA from positive co-integrates was injected into pronuclei from FVB/N oocytes to generate transgenic mice.For the D2R-DARPP-32/Myc mouse, a 484bp segment of the Drd2 promoter corresponding to the region immediately adjacent to the start codon was placed 5’ to mouse DARPP-32 cDNA containing a c-terminal Myc tag (SEQKLISEEDL). Venus cDNA was excised from the vector and replaced with ECFP cDNA (Clontech). Direct evidence for the hypothesis that cocaine and haloperidol differentially target these two neuronal populations has been lacking due to the inability to distinguish phosphorylation responses in these neurons. Sections were acetylated for 10 minutes and then dehydrated in a series of ethanols and incubated overnight at 55°C in a humidity chamber with 2 × 106 cpm of probe per slide mixed in hybridization buffer. The next day slides were washed 4 times in 4x SSC and incubated with RNAse A for 15 minutes at 37°C. Mice were perfused 5 days following the injection. The Myc antibody was coupled to the Dynabeads following the protocol in the product manual; 3ug of Myc antibody was added for every 5ul of magnetic beads.Following the overnight incubation, the homogenate/antibody mixture was placed on a magnetic particle concentrator (“MPC”, Invitrogen) for 2 minutes to separate the Myc magnetic beads from the Flag affinity gel. The Myc magnetic beads were washed three times in 1x PBS using the MPC to separate the beads each time. After the final wash, 30uL of non-reducing sample buffer (Pierce) was added and the beads were boiled for two minutes. Samples were stored at −80°C until used for immunoblotting.Flag IP/homogenate mixtures were spun down for 30 seconds at 13,000 rpm and unbound supernatant was removed to a fresh tube. 1ul of this unbound supernatant was used in a BCA protein assay (Pierce) to determine protein concentration. ImmunoblottingFlag IP, Myc IP and total striatum samples were loaded onto 10.5−14% Tris-HCl gels, separated by electrophoresis and transferred to PVDF membranes. Antibody binding was revealed by HRP conjugated goat anti-rabbit or mouse IgG (1:10,000) and the ECL detection method (PerkinElmer) with Kodak BioMax film. Total DARPP-32 antibody binding was revealed by HRP conjugated goat anti-mouse IgG (1:10,000). The brains were rapidly removed and placed in ice-cold, oxygenated Krebs–HCO3− buffer (124 mM NaCl, 4 mM KCl, 26 mM NaHCO3, 1.5 mM CaCl2, 1.25 mM KH2PO4, 1.5 mM MgSO4 and 10 mM d-glucose, pH 7.4). Coronal slices (350 μm) were prepared using a vibrating blade microtome, VT1000S (Leica Microsystems). Drugs used: SKF 81297 5mg/kg (Tocris); Quinpirole 0.2 mg/kg, Caffeine 7.5 mg/kg, Cocaine 25 mg/kg, Haloperidol 1mg/kg, Clozapine 5 mg/kg (all from Sigma). Drugs used: SKF 81297 5mg/kg (Tocris); Quinpirole 0.2 mg/kg, Caffeine 7.5 mg/kg, Cocaine 25 mg/kg, Haloperidol 1mg/kg, Clozapine 5 mg/kg (all from Sigma). The Internal Ribosome Entry Site (IRES) in these constructs allowed separate translation of tagged DARPP-32 and fluorescent marker proteins from the same mRNA transcript. There was strong striatal expression seen in both D1R-DARPP-32/Flag and D2R-DARPP-32/Myc mice. These results confirmed that the D1R construct was expressed selectively in striatonigral neurons, whereas the D2R construct was excluded from these cells. PKA also phosphorylates and activates protein phosphatase 2A (PP-2A), which dephosphorylates DARPP-32 at T753, 4. The fact that basal T34 and T75 phosphorylation levels were unaltered further indicates that there were no major signaling alterations in these neurons due to the expression of the tagged proteins.We developed an immunoprecipitation (IP) protocol using antibodies against the Flag and Myc tags which allowed selective purification of DARPP-32 from D1R and D2R-expressing striatal neurons (Fig. We observed a small size shift in the DARPP-32 bands from the IP eluates due to the presence of the Flag and Myc tags (Fig. We observed a small size shift in the DARPP-32 bands from the IP eluates due to the presence of the Flag and Myc tags (Fig. We observed a small size shift in the DARPP-32 bands from the IP eluates due to the presence of the Flag and Myc tags (Fig. Activation of Gi-coupled D2 receptors inhibits the cAMP/PKA/PP-2A signaling cascade resulting in a decrease in T34 phosphorylation and an increase in T75 phosphorylation in total striatal homogenates3. Activation of Gi-coupled D2 receptors inhibits the cAMP/PKA/PP-2A signaling cascade resulting in a decrease in T34 phosphorylation and an increase in T75 phosphorylation in total striatal homogenates3. Activation of Gi-coupled D2 receptors inhibits the cAMP/PKA/PP-2A signaling cascade resulting in a decrease in T34 phosphorylation and an increase in T75 phosphorylation in total striatal homogenates3. In D1R neurons, there was no change in T34 phosphorylation; however, quinpirole induced a small increase in T75 phosphorylation (122.2% ± 6% of control, p<.05; Fig. In D1R neurons, there was no change in T34 phosphorylation; however, quinpirole induced a small increase in T75 phosphorylation (122.2% ± 6% of control, p<.05; Fig. In D1R neurons, there was no change in T34 phosphorylation; however, quinpirole induced a small increase in T75 phosphorylation (122.2% ± 6% of control, p<.05; Fig. Cocaine blocks the dopamine transporter increasing the availability of dopamine at the synapse. Cocaine blocks the dopamine transporter increasing the availability of dopamine at the synapse. 