Mix gently by flicking the tube, then spin briefly.Spin the PCR tubes from step 4 briefly to collect the solution at the bottom of the tube and put the tubes back onto the PCR rack.Add 8 μl of the above mixture (step 5) into each PCR tube, mix gently by flicking the tube, then spin briefly. The PCR is commonly carried out in a reaction volume of 10–200 μl in small reaction tubes (0.2–0.5 ml volumes) in a thermal cycler. In this chapter, we will describe the methods to determine gene expression by using RT-PCR and real-time PCR. 1) and analyzed by Quantity One.To semi-quantify the expression level of mRNA, intensities of target gene products are normalized to that of housekeeping gene to obtain the relative densities. RT-PCR as a relatively simple, inexpensive, extremely sensitive and specific tool to determine the expression level of target genes. When this probe is intact and excited by a light source, the Reporter dye's emission is suppressed by the Quencher dye as a result of the close proximity of the dyes. When the probe is cleaved by the 5′ nuclease activity of the enzyme, the distance between the Reporter and the Quencher increases causing the transfer of energy to stop. When the probe is cleaved by the 5′ nuclease activity of the enzyme, the distance between the Reporter and the Quencher increases causing the transfer of energy to stop. The fluorescent emissions of the reporter increase and the quencher decrease. The fluorescent emissions of the reporter increase and the quencher decrease. When SYBR Green dye binds to double-stranded DNA, the intensity of the fluorescent emissions increases. Mix gently by flicking the tube, then spin briefly.In each well of 96-well PCR plate, add 19 μl of the above mixture to the bottom of the tube.Add 1 μl of cDNA sample in each well (see Note 40). Repeat homogenization for several times or until no tissues are visible.The homogenizer we used is from Glas-Col, Terre Haute, IN.TRI Reagent is not compatible with plastic culture plates.Trypsin digestion of cells may result in RNA degradation.After addition of the TRI Reagent, we usually put the dish or plate on a shaker for 5–10 min to let cells lyse totally.Some yeast and bacterial cells may require a homogenizer.After the cells have been homogenized or lysed in TRI Reagent, samples can be stored at −70°C for up to 1 month.The chloroform used for phase separation should not contain isoamyl alcohol or other additives.The mixture also can be put in −4 or −20°C for 1 h.If the RNA pellets float, after vortexing, centrifuge at 12,000 × g for 5 min at 2–8°C.Samples can be stored in ethanol at 2–8°C for at least 1 week and up to 1 year at −20°C.A more complete evaporation of ethanol is required when RNA samples are to be used in RT-PCR. EtBr is a potent mutagen that must be handled carefully to avoid skin contact and contamination of the lab. EtBr is a potent mutagen that must be handled carefully to avoid skin contact and contamination of the lab. The amount of EtBr to add is as follows: of a 0.5 mg/ml stock solution, add 1/1,000 to your gel. The amount of EtBr to add is as follows: of a 0.5 mg/ml stock solution, add 1/1,000 to your gel. The amount of EtBr to add is as follows: of a 0.5 mg/ml stock solution, add 1/1,000 to your gel. (d)Cooling the rotor and thermal chamber at 25°C.If there is more than one peak in the melting curve, you need to either optimize the PCR parameters or redesign the primers.The expression level of each gene can also be calculated as copy number or others such as nanomoles, nanograms, and so on. (d)Cooling the rotor and thermal chamber at 25°C.If there is more than one peak in the melting curve, you need to either optimize the PCR parameters or redesign the primers.The expression level of each gene can also be calculated as copy number or others such as nanomoles, nanograms, and so on. PCR can amplify a single or a few copies of a piece of DNA across several orders of magnitude, generating thousands to millions of copies of a particular DNA sequence. Store at room temperature.Isopropanol. The study of gene expression in a cell or tissue at a particular moment gives an insight into the capacity of the cell for protein synthesis. Reverse TranscriptionM-MLV reverse transcriptase with 5× M-MLV reaction buffer. Store at 2–8°C.Thermal cycler (Mastercycler, Eppendorf, Westbury, NY). Store at −20°C.GoTaq® DNA Polymerase with 5× reaction buffer. Store at room temperature.Molecular grade and nuclease-free water. Among these techniques, Northern blot analysis remains a standard method for detection and quantitation of mRNA levels despite the advent of more robust techniques. Although it is convenient, time-saving, and avoids contact with phenol/chloroform using commercially available kits, those kits using silica-membrane spin columns may not be ideal for studies of insoluble nanoparticle since the nanoparticles may clog the membrane pore of the spin column. It performs well with large or small amounts of tissue or cells. One milliliter of the reagent is sufficient to lyse 5–10 × 106 animal, plant, or yeast cells, or 107 bacterial cells (see Notes 10 and 11).In order to minimize the possibility of DNA contamination in the RNA extracted by TRI Reagent, after homogenization, centrifuge the homogenate at 12,000 × g for 10 min at 2–8°C to remove the insoluble material (extracellular membranes, polysaccharides, and high molecular mass DNA). RNA IsolationTransfer the colorless upper aqueous phase to a fresh tube and add 0.5 ml of isopropanol per ml of TRI Reagent used in Subheading 3.1.1, step 1 and mix. To facilitate dissolution, mix by repeated pipetting with a micropipette at 55–60°C for 10–15 min (see Note 17).Measure the concentration of total RNA: in a sterile and RNase-free tube, add 48 μl of molecular grade and nuclease-free water and 2 μl of total RNA from step 3 to make a total volume of 50 μl. Mix well.Measure the absorbance at 260 and 280 nm with a Spectrophotometer (DU 730 Spectrophotometer, Beckman Coulter, Fullerton, CA) (see Notes 18–21). Although there are many kits commercially available for RT, the reverse transcriptase used in those kits usually is M-MLV reverse transcriptase from the Moloney murine leukemia virus or AMV reverse transcriptase from the avian myeloblastosis virus. M-MLV reverse transcriptase is the preferred reverse transcriptase in cDNA synthesis for long messenger RNA (mRNA) templates (>5 kb) because the RNase H activity of M-MLV reverse transcriptase is weaker than the commonly used AMV reverse transcriptase (2). M-MLV reverse transcriptase is the preferred reverse transcriptase in cDNA synthesis for long messenger RNA (mRNA) templates (>5 kb) because the RNase H activity of M-MLV reverse transcriptase is weaker than the commonly used AMV reverse transcriptase (2). M-MLV reverse transcriptase is the preferred reverse transcriptase in cDNA synthesis for long messenger RNA (mRNA) templates (>5 kb) because the RNase H activity of M-MLV reverse transcriptase is weaker than the commonly used AMV reverse transcriptase (2). Since M-MLV reverse transcriptase is less processive than AMV reverse transcriptase, therefore, more units of the M-MLV enzyme are required to generate the same amount of cDNA as in the AMV reaction (2). 