Finally, hair measures provide a cumulative measure of exposure (over 6 weeks in this study), but cannot assess gradations of recent or intermittent use. At present, since there is no alternative agent approved for PrEP beyond TDF/FTC, no option for PrEP in individuals with a CrCl ≤60 ml/min, and no data on the long-term effects of PrEP on those with borderline renal function, research to identify the minimum frequency of renal monitoring required for the safe use of TDF/FTC-based PrEP is needed. In this analysis, we define subgroups of individuals in the iPrEx open label extension (OLE) study15 - a cohort of men-who-have-sex-with-men (MSM) and transgender women on PrEP who were former participants of PrEP trials and then enrolled into iPrEx OLE - with varying risks of renal decline. In a subset of iPrEx OLE participants, we additionally examine the impact of long-term exposure to tenofovir (TFV), the active moiety of TDF, and FTC, both assessed via hair concentrations16, on renal function. Prior studies by our group have shown a linear relationship between oral TDF dose and concentrations of TFV in hair16. Serum creatinine (Cr) was measured every 12 weeks and CrCl – the parameter recommended for safety monitoring by CDC guidelines19- estimated by the Cockcroft-Gault equation.20 Analyses were repeated with the outcome of estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) calculated by the Modification of Diet in Renal Disease (MDRD) equation.21 Hair was not collected on all 1224 participants in iPrEx OLE due to site and protocol constraints. Of the participants offered hair sampling in iPrEx OLE (324), 68% agreed to hair collection. Results of hair testing were not reported back to participants.After storage and shipment at ambient temperature to our University of California San Francisco (UCSF)-based “Hair Analytical Laboratory” (HAL), the proximal 1·5 centimeter of each hair sample (representing ~6 weeks exposure) was cut finely with scissors and 5 milligrams (mg) processed and analyzed using liquid-chromatography/tandem-mass-spectrometry (LC-MS/MS)16. Statistical analysisThe percent change in CrCl from the baseline value at each timepoint was estimated (mean ± standard error (SE)) from a linear mixed effects model for all iPrEx OLE participants, adjusted for age, baseline CrCl, and site of enrollment. Statistical analysisThe percent change in CrCl from the baseline value at each timepoint was estimated (mean ± standard error (SE)) from a linear mixed effects model for all iPrEx OLE participants, adjusted for age, baseline CrCl, and site of enrollment. Of 1224 participants (7475 person-visits) who received PrEP in iPrEx OLE with renal data available (only 1 with missing data), 220 were in the hair substudy (1114 person-visits). Over the duration of the study (median 72 weeks, IQR 71 to 73), the average decline in CrCl for all participants in iPrEx OLE was −2·9% (95% CI: −2·4% to −3·4%), p<0.0001 for trend. Over the duration of the study (median 72 weeks, IQR 71 to 73), the average decline in CrCl for all participants in iPrEx OLE was −2·9% (95% CI: −2·4% to −3·4%), p<0.0001 for trend. Over the duration of the study (median 72 weeks, IQR 71 to 73), the average decline in CrCl for all participants in iPrEx OLE was −2·9% (95% CI: −2·4% to −3·4%), p<0.0001 for trend. Identifying subgroups of individuals who might warrant more (or less) intensive safety monitoring during PrEP will facilitate its safe scale-up. The median self-reported adherence in the visits where no drug was detected was 73% (Table 1). The median self-reported adherence in the visits where no drug was detected was 73% (Table 1). There was a monotonic relationship between percent decrease in CrCl and increasing quartile of TFV (p 0·008 for trend) or FTC concentrations (p 0·006 for trend) in hair. There was no difference in mean changes in CrCl between those taking 4–6 pills per week compared with 7 per week (p=0·93). Similar results were seen when analyses, both in the entire iPrEx OLE cohort and the participants in the hair substudy, were repeated with the outcome of renal function calculated by the MDRD equation (eGFR)21 instead of via the Cockcroft-Gault equation (CrCl)20 (data not shown). The duration of follow-up in these studies was ≤36 months and the average decline in renal function measured by estimated creatinine clearance (CrCl) in iPrEx was 2·4%3. In this study, as in many others, self-reported adherence correlated poorly with adherence adjudicated by pharmacologic measures. adherence or drug-taking), but also monitor pharmacokinetic variability in drug concentrations, serving as a direct assessment of exposure, either short or long-term, depending on the matrix. For example, plasma measures of drug assess exposure over days, whereas drug concentrations in PBMCs assess exposure over weeks26. Of note, as with TDF/FTC-based treatment11, greater declines in renal function on TDF/FTC-based PrEP were seen in those who started with the highest baseline CrCl. Of note, as with TDF/FTC-based treatment11, greater declines in renal function on TDF/FTC-based PrEP were seen in those who started with the highest baseline CrCl. Of note, as with TDF/FTC-based treatment11, greater declines in renal function on TDF/FTC-based PrEP were seen in those who started with the highest baseline CrCl. Moreover, in iPrEx and Partners PrEP, declines in renal function were mostly reversible 4–20 weeks after discontinuation3,7. The relatively short duration of follow-up for this study is a limitation when extrapolating findings to the real-world roll-out of PrEP. Moreover, iPrEx OLE enrolled only former participants of clinical PrEP trials, which all required normal renal function at baseline. Moreover, iPrEx OLE enrolled only former participants of clinical PrEP trials, which all required normal renal function at baseline. Moreover, iPrEx OLE enrolled only former participants of clinical PrEP trials, which all required normal renal function at baseline. Even though entrance to the open-label extension phase did not require normal renal function, this original limitation still restricts generalizability. 