Special attention is paid to correct the posteromedial retrusion of the lateral orbital rims. Special attention is paid to correct the posteromedial retrusion of the lateral orbital rims. Special attention is paid to correct the posteromedial retrusion of the lateral orbital rims. The values were compared to age- and sex-matched normative data.17 Standard (z) scores were calculated using the formula z = (x − x̄)/SD, where x is the patient measurement, x̄ is the mean normative value, and SD is the standard deviation of the mean normative data). Preoperative measurements were taken in the operating room, just before surgical correction (range, 7.2 to 15.4 months). Mean forehead width z-scores decreased postoperatively from 0.82 to −0.32 (p = 0.007) (Fig. The estimated effect of bandeau width before fronto-orbital advancement was negligible (0.02 z-score increase per 1 mm). Mean cranial width z-scores decreased postoperatively from 0.9 to 0.2 in the 12 patients for whom both measures were available (p = 0.003). Mean perioperative interdacryon distance was 13.7 ± 1.9 mm (nonsyndromic, 13.7 mm; syndromic, 14.0 mm). There are few published long-term outcomes in patients with corrected metopic synostosis, and most reports rely on subjective evaluation.13,16,18–20 Our results confirm the observations of other authors that frontal width exhibits decreased growth compared with the normal population, leading to bilateral fronto-orbital retrusion and temporal hollowing16 (Fig. Kolar and Salter documented a preoperative z-score of −0.48 for frontal breadth in their 50 patients.5 The difference in z-scores between these two reports highlights the difficulty in measuring this dimension. Kolar and Salter documented a preoperative z-score of −0.48 for frontal breadth in their 50 patients.5 The difference in z-scores between these two reports highlights the difficulty in measuring this dimension. Kolar and Salter documented a preoperative z-score of −0.48 for frontal breadth in their 50 patients.5 The difference in z-scores between these two reports highlights the difficulty in measuring this dimension. A lower number of reoperations and less postoperative temporal hollowing were seen in their patients treated with maximal expansion of the supraorbital bar and stabilization of the construction with strategic bone grafting and resorbable fixation. Beckett et al  characterized patients with metopic synostosis as “moderate” or “severe” based on the fronto-orbital deformity.8 The severe group had significantly narrower fronto-orbital dimensions, whereas the moderate group did not differ from controls. They measured the mean interdacryon distance at age 5 months in the severe group to be 14.1 mm, similar to the values in our cohort (mean, 13.7 mm; range, 11 to 18). Contrary to traditional descriptions of trigonocephaly, orbital hypotelorism was not documented in our study. Contrary to traditional descriptions of trigonocephaly, orbital hypotelorism was not documented in our study. Contrary to traditional descriptions of trigonocephaly, orbital hypotelorism was not documented in our study. They used indirect anthropometry from computed tomographic images at a mean age of 7 ± 1.7 months and found a mean preoperative intercanthal distance of 26.6 ± 1 mm (z = 0.5). To improve accuracy, intercanthal and interdacryon dimensions in our study were measured at a mean age of 10 months in the operating room while the child was under general anesthesia. It is controversial whether orbital hypotelorism needs to be corrected or can be corrected. The mean intercanthal distance in our study remained unchanged in relation to normal values (z = 0.1). Our findings confirm that attempts to repair orbital hypotelorism are unnecessary. Posteromedial retrusion of the lateral orbital rim is a common finding in infants with metopic synostosis; this finding can be used to differentiate between physiologic and pathologic closure of the metopic suture.7 To prevent a palpable stepoff along the lateral orbital rim after frontal advancement, Marsh and Schwartz extended the lateral orbital wall osteotomy into the body of the zygoma during removal of the bandeau.11 This technique involves more dissection and detachment of the lateral canthal tendon. Anthropometric data were available for only 16 of 34 patients treated by the senior author. The difficulty in identifying the frontotemporale, as noted above, especially in children with craniosynostosis, complicates comparison to other studies using this anthropometric point. 