A large prospective randomized study however of this nature would be prohibitive given the constraints of patient staffing and physical space within an NICU environment. In this analysis, average census positively correlated with MRSA colonization only within the single-patient room configuration. Apgar score, temperature on admission, and initial blood gas results were gathered from our NICU’s National Institute of Child Health and Human Development dataset10 and the Clinical Investigation Data Exploration Repository.11 Finally, patient-specific information regarding all positive cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and blood cultures from NICU patients for the study interval was provided by the microbiology laboratory information system (Cerner Millennium, Kansas City, MO).HMIS data included daily room assignments, allowing for each patient’s NICU room assignment and bed configuration type to be tracked on a day-by-day basis. Patients who transferred between open-unit and single-patient rooms had all data removed from the analyses. Patients who transferred between open-unit and single-patient rooms had all data removed from the analyses. MRSA GenotypingAnterior nares swab cultures were used to screen for MRSA colonization as part of routine infection control measures on admission and weekly thereafter, per institution protocol. MRSA GenotypingAnterior nares swab cultures were used to screen for MRSA colonization as part of routine infection control measures on admission and weekly thereafter, per institution protocol. MRSA GenotypingAnterior nares swab cultures were used to screen for MRSA colonization as part of routine infection control measures on admission and weekly thereafter, per institution protocol. Barrier PrecautionsAll patients, regardless of MRSA colonization status, were cared for using standard precautions. Observations of compliance occurred weekdays during the day shift and covered all areas of the NICU. A provider who exited one bed space, performed hand hygiene, and entered another bed space remained compliant as long as no other surfaces were contacted during this transition. DefinitionsConfirmed Late-onset SepsisConfirmed late-onset sepsis (CLOS) was defined as a having a culture-positive bacterial infection of the blood or CSF on or after 72 hours of life for which the patient was treated with antibiotics for 5 or more days.3, 15 Episodes of positive bacterial cultures not meeting this definition and non-pathogenic bacteria typically considered contaminants were removed from further analysis.Illness Severity IndicesMaximum Acuity ScoreAcuity scores were based on level of care required by each patient, and consisted of type and level of ventilator assistance, presence or absence of central lines, need for and frequency of laboratory draws, and patient monitoring. For each patient, the maximum acuity score throughout their stay was used in the analysis.CRIB-II ScoreThe CRIB-II score (clinical risk index for babies) is an aggregation of clinical and laboratory data that is used to provide risk adjustment of mortality and neurologic dysfunction across institutions.16–18 It is a sum of scores for the combination of birth weight, gestational age, and gender; admission temperature; and base excess. For patients born after > 32 weeks gestation or whose birth weights were in excess of 3000 grams, only the temperature and base excess portions of the CRIB-II were used.19 CRIB-II scores were available for 1128 patients. Additionally, time-independent incidences of these endpoints were compared using Chi-square tests and Fisher’s exact tests, where appropriate. Our NICU, which has both single-patient and open-unit beds, provided an opportunity to test the hypothesis that infants in single-patient rooms have a lower risk of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) colonization, late-onset sepsis, and death. DemographicsThe 1823 subjects representing 55,166 patient days were included in this analysis. Patients in single-patient and open-unit rooms were similar in terms of birth weight, gestational age at birth, gender, race, insurance type, and illness severity based on CRIB-II score, 5-minute Apgar score, and maximum acuity score (Table 1).The median daily census over the study period was significantly greater in the single-patient rooms than open-unit rooms (32 vs. 31, ANOVA p<0.001). Figure 1 demonstrates the similarity in MRSA-free survival over time between the two bed configurations. Univariate Cox regression showed no difference in MRSA colonization rates between bed configurations (Chi-square p=0.10); this similarity persisted when controlling for demographic (birth weight, gestational age, gender, race, insurance type), patient-driven (CRIB-II score, 5-minute Apgar score, and maximum acuity) and unit-driven (average census, MCP, and hand hygiene adherence) variables (Table 2). Coagulase-negative Staphylococcus species was the most frequent pathogen recovered from cultures in both configurations at 43% of all positive cultures. With few patients having multiple episodes and concerns that an earlier course of sepsis and antibiotics might influence a second episode of CLOS, only the first episode was entered into the analysis. A Kaplan-Meier plot (FIGURE 3) demonstrates similarity of survival when controlling only for bed configuration (log-rank p=0.78). Late-onset Sepsis or DeathTo ensure that death did not mask differences in rates of sepsis between bed configurations, a combined outcome of CLOS or death was used. Vietri, et al, reported similarity in MRSA colonization rates between bed configurations before and after conversion of an adult ICU from an open-unit configuration to single- or double-patient rooms.20 Domanico, et al, also compared intervals and found lower MRSA colonization rates in a NICU when converting from open-unit configuration to single-patient rooms.9 The contemporaneous comparison of the two bed configurations in our study minimized potential bias from changing clinical practices or practitioners. The large sample size of this study and the contemporaneous housing provide the power to detect clinically significant hazard ratios for each of our outcomes. 