The analysis of vascular territories was based on standard territories in healthy normal subjects and may not be entirely accurate in a moyamoya cohort in whom extensive collateralization may cause vascular territory boundaries to shift. The timing of the MRI to assess for irreversible ischemia after acetazolamide might not be optimal, as only early sign of ischemia would be visible, and a later DWI, such as at 24–72 h, might reveal lesions not visible immediately postvascular challenge. However, the ASL signal is strongly dependent on the time the blood takes to reach the tissue of interest from the labeling plane. Therefore, ASL using a single post-label delay might not properly reflect the true CBF, while an ASL acquisition with multiple post-label delay times might mitigate this effect [10]. We declare that all patients gave informed consent prior to inclusion in this study. Moyamoya disease is characterized by progressive stenosis of the distal intracranial internal carotid arteries and the proximal parts of the anterior and middle cerebral arteries [1]. Other parameters were as follows: TR = 4844 ms, TE = 11 ms, time of labeling = 2 s, post-label delays = 0.7, 1.3,1.9, 2.5, and 3.0 s, field of view = 240 × 240 mm2, number of slices = 36, voxel size = 6 × 6 × 5 mm3, and NEX = 1, scan time = 3:36 min (which includes all five post-label delay times and a proton density images required to calculate CBF). [2] in Dai et al  [10])) average was used to determine the final CBF. The presence of a fetal origin of the posterior cerebral artery was noted. The severity of previous infarction was categorized as normal, with small infarct, and with large infarct. Regions of interest and data analysisAll images were co-registered to the MNI brain template using MINC [13]. The regions were divided to correspond to the vascular territory of the major cerebral arteries. The regions were divided to correspond to the vascular territory of the major cerebral arteries. (3) Sub-clinical, “pre-stroke”, apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) changes post-acetazolamide challenge were studied as function of baseline ATT, change in ATT, or CVR. Significance level was set to α < 0.05 and corrected for false discovery rate using the Benjamini–Hochberg procedure. Seven of 60 posterior cerebral arteries were of fetal origin. Fifty-four percent of cerebral arteries were normal, 28% mildly/moderately stenosed, and 18% severely stenosed or occluded (Table 1). In territories where the artery was mildly/moderately stenosed, no infarct was found in 84%, small infarcts in 14%, and large infarcts in 2%. In territories where the artery was mildly/moderately stenosed, no infarct was found in 84%, small infarcts in 14%, and large infarcts in 2%. In territories where the artery was mildly/moderately stenosed, no infarct was found in 84%, small infarcts in 14%, and large infarcts in 2%. Representative examples of pre- and post-acetazolamide imaging of CBF, ATT, and ADC in several patients are shown in Fig. Finally, we found a significant negative correlation between CVR and baseline ATT that was visible in all three groups, but which was statistically significant only for the regions of mild/moderate stenosis (normal: r = −0.39, p < 0.0001; mild/moderate stenosis: r = −0.53, p < 0.0001; severe stenosis/occlusion: r = −0.47, p < 0.006; Fig. The detailed review of the DWI images before and after the acetazolamide challenge showed no appearance of new DWI restriction foci, in any of the 30 patients. The detailed review of the DWI images before and after the acetazolamide challenge showed no appearance of new DWI restriction foci, in any of the 30 patients. Many of these patients had subsequent bypass surgery thereafter, making it difficult to assess for new neurological deficits. Many of these patients had subsequent bypass surgery thereafter, making it difficult to assess for new neurological deficits. We also observed a negative correlation between CVR and baseline ATT, which suggests that ATT might be of a certain value to evaluate the CVR if an acetazolamide challenge cannot be obtained. We also observed a negative correlation between CVR and baseline ATT, which suggests that ATT might be of a certain value to evaluate the CVR if an acetazolamide challenge cannot be obtained. We also observed a negative correlation between CVR and baseline ATT, which suggests that ATT might be of a certain value to evaluate the CVR if an acetazolamide challenge cannot be obtained. This suggests that there is an increase in flow velocity between labeling plane and imaging plane, but it is not possible to figure out whether this increase arises predominantly in smaller or larger arteries. Despite this value, and although there is a long history of the use of vasodilatory agents in patients with advanced cerebrovascular disease, there exist concerns about the safety of acetazolamide in moyamoya patients due to the potential for CBF reduction (“cerebrovascular steal”) [6]. Yun et al  [20] found a significant increase in CVR with ASL and single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), in moyamoya patients 6 months after bypass surgery. While both stable xenon computed tomography (CT) and 15O–H2O positron emission tomography (PET) are considered reference standard measurements for CBF [24], they were not performed as part of this study. 