This was the reason she had no residual stomach for use as the interposition, as would be the case for standard Ivor-Lewis esophagectomy. The patient had multiple upper GI imaging studies demonstrating reflux of jejunal contents into the esophagus, both in upright and prone positions, and the more severe reflux in the prone position likely contributed to her aspiration episodes. At the current time, she had a total symptom score of 11 (range 0–20, none to worse), with a quality of life score of −3 (scale −3 to +3, worst to best). During upper endoscopy, performed with the patient under monitored anesthesia care, endoscopic placement of temporary electrodes was undertaken in both jejunal limbs (Video 1, available online at www.giejournal.org). The esophagojejunal anastomosis was visualized at 25 cm from the incisors, and there was no evidence of stricture or recurrent tumor. Then, a temporary cardiac pacing lead (model 6414-200; Medtronic, Minneapolis, Minn) was inserted through the accessory channel. This temporary lead has an inner bipolar pacing lead and an outer covering sheath. It has been proposed that the occurrence of Roux stasis syndrome is related to the blockage of electrical conduction caused by cutting of the jejunum.3 The small intestine may lose the stimulation of pacemaker potential initiated from the duodenum because of disruption in continuity of the small intestine.4 Further, this may cause ectopic pacemakers to arise in the Roux limb. With stimulation, the frequency of the afferent (distal) limb changed from 4.1 cycles per minute (cpm) at day 0 to 9.0 cpm at day 5. With stimulation, the frequency of the afferent (distal) limb changed from 4.1 cycles per minute (cpm) at day 0 to 9.0 cpm at day 5. Similar health-related quality of life scores have been validated in previous studies.10 Further, the patient was able to tolerate a soft, low-residue diet very well during the 5-day period. A radionuclide emptying study performed before temporary stimulation demonstrated a normal amount of residual content in the area of what should have been the stomach. A radionuclide emptying study performed before temporary stimulation demonstrated a normal amount of residual content in the area of what should have been the stomach. This creates stasis in the Roux limb and slows emptying.5,6 This concept is supported by the normalization of the electrogastrogram of the afferent (distal) limb with stimulation, with the frequency having increased from 4.1 cpm to 9.0 cpm. Also, there is a likelihood of spectrum effect/bias in this patient with such severe symptoms; however, the improvement in her electrogastrogram parameters with electrical stimulation as well as the apparent improvement noted on the radionuclide emptying study probably indicates a true improvement secondary to electrical stimulation. In the current case, the application of GI electrical stimulation in intractable delayed emptying and stasis of the atonic intrathoracic jejunal limbs after esophagojejunostomy seems very promising. In the current case, the application of GI electrical stimulation in intractable delayed emptying and stasis of the atonic intrathoracic jejunal limbs after esophagojejunostomy seems very promising. Implanting permanent electrodes surgically in this patient would have required a thoracotomy or thoracoscopy. The patient has been scheduled for thoracotomy with placement of permanent electrodes on the intrathoracic portion of the jejunal limbs. The patient has been scheduled for thoracotomy with placement of permanent electrodes on the intrathoracic portion of the jejunal limbs. 