Kaede-positive growth cones were UV illuminated for 6 seconds, which efficiently converted the green into red fluorescence (Fig. Kaede-positive growth cones were UV illuminated for 6 seconds, which efficiently converted the green into red fluorescence (Fig. These findings suggest that asymmetrical β-actin synthesis may be involved in growth cone turning. 3k-q), or if growth cones received a control vehicle instead of netrin-1 (Fig. 3k-q), or if growth cones received a control vehicle instead of netrin-1 (Fig. 3k-q), or if growth cones received a control vehicle instead of netrin-1 (Fig. 3k-q), or if growth cones received a control vehicle instead of netrin-1 (Fig. In fact, in these control conditions, there was a slight decrease in green fluorescence due to photobleaching, suggesting that the netrin-1-induced increase in green fluorescence is underestimated. These data indicate that the β-actin 3’UTR drives the translation of new protein in response to netrin-1. The gradient was produced by pulsatile ejection from a micropipette6 positioned at a 90° angle to the growth cone (Fig. The gradient was produced by pulsatile ejection from a micropipette6 positioned at a 90° angle to the growth cone (Fig. Thus, a netrin-1 gradient elicits the polarized transport of Vg1RBP into filopodia. First, the degree of phosphorylation on the ‘near’ and ‘far’ sides was taken as the ratio of phospho-4EBP to total-4EBP intensity per unit area (Fig. Phosphorylation asymmetry was calculated as the near/far ratio of 4EBP phosphorylation. Phosphorylation asymmetry was calculated as the near/far ratio of 4EBP phosphorylation. Second, phosphorylation asymmetry was calculated as the difference between the ‘centers of mass’ of phospho- and total-4EBP intensity (Experimental Procedures and Fig. Second, phosphorylation asymmetry was calculated as the difference between the ‘centers of mass’ of phospho- and total-4EBP intensity (Experimental Procedures and Fig. Rapamycin-treated growth cones exhibited no significant asymmetry in 4EBP phosphorylation (Fig. Growth cones stimulated with a netrin-1 gradient, but not control growth cones, commonly exhibited an asymmetric distribution of β-actin QIF signal with a near/far ratio of 1.35:1 (Fig. 7c,f; 13.1°) but growth cones containing β-actin AMOs were not attracted to a netrin-1 gradient (Fig. 7c,f; 13.1°) but growth cones containing β-actin AMOs were not attracted to a netrin-1 gradient (Fig. These results suggest that the attractive turning to netrin-1 requires rapid local β-actin synthesis.To test whether AMOs inhibit the general responsiveness of growth cones to chemotropic cues we examined whether β-actin-AMO-containing growth cones were sensitive to repulsive cues. β-actin AMO and control AMO growth cones grew on laminin at the same rate (0.5 μm min-1). Our results show that inhibition of β-actin translation differentially affects attractive and repulsive responses and indicate that β-actin translation is of particular importance for attractive turning. Our results show that inhibition of β-actin translation differentially affects attractive and repulsive responses and indicate that β-actin translation is of particular importance for attractive turning. The increase occurs just 5 minutes after addition of netrin-1 and is abolished by inhibitors of translation. This relatively small knockdown of β-actin probably reflects the large maternal pool of actin that is recycled for the first 24-36 hours of embryonic development and likely predominates in the pioneering population of retinal axons, which develop just 28 hours post-fertilization. It could be argued that attractive turning is more sensitive to β-actin levels (and hence actin polymerization rates) than axon extension or repulsive turning, and the β-actin AMO knocks down baseline β-actin translation levels just enough to block attractive turning but not extension or repulsion. The restricted size of the growth cone compartment would concentrate newly synthesized β-actin monomers in a small volume, thereby contributing to rapid formation of nucleation sites. The restricted size of the growth cone compartment would concentrate newly synthesized β-actin monomers in a small volume, thereby contributing to rapid formation of nucleation sites. The restricted size of the growth cone compartment would concentrate newly synthesized β-actin monomers in a small volume, thereby contributing to rapid formation of nucleation sites. The restricted size of the growth cone compartment would concentrate newly synthesized β-actin monomers in a small volume, thereby contributing to rapid formation of nucleation sites. As β-actin synthesis occurs at least 10 minutes before overt turning, we hypothesize that asymmetrical β-actin translation prefigures the turn itself. Although our dynamic imaging studies could not demonstrate that the Vg1RBP-eGFP granules moving into filopodia were specifically transporting β-actin mRNA, fixed samples showed that Vg1RBP colocalizes with β-actin mRNA and the netrin-1-induced increase in filopodial Vg1RBP is accompanied by an increase in filopodial β-actin mRNA. Although our dynamic imaging studies could not demonstrate that the Vg1RBP-eGFP granules moving into filopodia were specifically transporting β-actin mRNA, fixed samples showed that Vg1RBP colocalizes with β-actin mRNA and the netrin-1-induced increase in filopodial Vg1RBP is accompanied by an increase in filopodial β-actin mRNA. Although our dynamic imaging studies could not demonstrate that the Vg1RBP-eGFP granules moving into filopodia were specifically transporting β-actin mRNA, fixed samples showed that Vg1RBP colocalizes with β-actin mRNA and the netrin-1-induced increase in filopodial Vg1RBP is accompanied by an increase in filopodial β-actin mRNA. Further studies will be needed to test this idea, especially the identity of proteins synthesized in attractive versus repulsive conditions. These asymmetric changes precede growth cone turning and inhibition of β-actin synthesis by antisense morpholinos blocks the netrin-1-induced attractive turning, suggesting that spatially asymmetric translation of β-actin, biased to the near-side, directs turning towards the stimulus. Consistent with this, we have shown that Vg1RBP also interacts with cofilin mRNA, which is translated in response to the chemorepellent Slit-28. The exact sequence of signalling between DCC and Src remains largely unknown, but Src might in turn be activated by DCC through direct binding or via focal adhesion kinase (FAK), which interacts with DCC43. Consistent with this, the repellent Slit2 does not induce β-actin synthesis, and indeed causes a significant decrease in β-actin levels8, possibly caused by depolymerization due to Slit2-induced cofilin synthesis, combined with suppression of β-actin translation. Cycloheximide (25 μM, Sigma) and rapamycin (10 nM, Calbiochem) were bath-applied to retinal cultures immediately prior to the addition of netrin-1. Cycloheximide (25 μM, Sigma) and rapamycin (10 nM, Calbiochem) were bath-applied to retinal cultures immediately prior to the addition of netrin-1. The Zenon Rabbit IgG Labeling Kit (Molecular Probes) was used for 4EBP double staining (5:1 Zenon reagent:primary antibody ratio for phospho-4EBP, 3:1 for total-4EBP). Morpholinos and plasmidsAntisense morpholinos (AMOs) conjugated to lissamine were designed and supplied by GeneTools: Xenopus β-actin AMO: 5’-CAATATCGTCTTCCATTGTGATCTG-3’; control: 5’-CCTCTTACCTCAGTTACAATTTATA-3’. Immunoprecipitation and β-actin mRNA detectionAnalysis of Vg1RBP and β-actin mRNA interaction was performed as described8. Immunoprecipitation and β-actin mRNA detectionAnalysis of Vg1RBP and β-actin mRNA interaction was performed as described8. Immunoprecipitation and β-actin mRNA detectionAnalysis of Vg1RBP and β-actin mRNA interaction was performed as described8. Immunoprecipitation and β-actin mRNA detectionAnalysis of Vg1RBP and β-actin mRNA interaction was performed as described8. In situ hybridizationProbes were generated of a 446 bp fragment (1172-1618bp, Accession No. For fluorescence in situ hybridization, retinal cultures from stage 33/34 embryos were fixed in 4% PFA, 7.5% sucrose in PBS for 1 hour at RT. Hybridization was performed using 0.6 ng/μl riboprobes and subsequent detection of β-actin mRNA and Vg1RBP (1:300)12,49. Hybridization was performed using 0.6 ng/μl riboprobes and subsequent detection of β-actin mRNA and Vg1RBP (1:300)12,49. Growth cone turning and gradient assayGradients of diffusible netrin-1 protein and Sema3A supernatant (or control) were established as described previously10,30. The center of mass was analyzed using ImageJ software (NIH). The centers of mass of phospho-4EBP and total-4EBP fluorescence within the growth cone were calculated as the average of all pixel locations weighted by intensity. Filopodia length was measured using Openlab software (Improvision). Live cell imagingFluorescence recoveryStage 24 Kaede-β-actin 3’UTR injected retinal primordia were cultured for 24 hours and imaged for 30 minutes. Kaede-positive growth cones were selected and the whole neurite including the axon shaft was photoconverted by exposure to 340-380 nm irradiation. Kaede-positive growth cones were selected and the whole neurite including the axon shaft was photoconverted by exposure to 340-380 nm irradiation. To measure granule speed, images were captured every second. Openlab and Volocity software (Improvision) was used to calculate the number and speed of granules. On Western blots, the Vg1RBP antibody detected a predominant band of the expected size (65 kDa) in both head and eye lysates, verifying the specificity of the antibody (Fig. Movie 3Movement of Vg1RBP-eGFP granules into filopodial contact sites. Movie 3Movement of Vg1RBP-eGFP granules into filopodial contact sites. 2e) using immunostaining or Western blot analysis and exhibit similar granular localization patterns and levels of expression (Fig. Granule movement patterns ranged from oscillations with no net movement, to uni- and bi-directional movements over small and longer (> 10μm) distances. Recent findings show that chemotropic responses to netrin-1, Semaphorin 3A (Sema3A), Slit2 and brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) require local translation7-10 raising the question of whether asymmetrical protein synthesis influences growth cone turning in guidance cue gradients. An example is shown (Fig.2j-m and Supplementary movie 3) which illustrates anterograde transport of a Vg1RBP-eGFP granule moving to, and subsequently away from, a transient contact site between two filopodia (different cellular origins). An example is shown (Fig.2j-m and Supplementary movie 3) which illustrates anterograde transport of a Vg1RBP-eGFP granule moving to, and subsequently away from, a transient contact site between two filopodia (different cellular origins). An example is shown (Fig.2j-m and Supplementary movie 3) which illustrates anterograde transport of a Vg1RBP-eGFP granule moving to, and subsequently away from, a transient contact site between two filopodia (different cellular origins). Fluorescent labelling of AMOs enabled us to restrict our analyses to growth cones known to contain AMOs (see Supplementary Fig. Fluorescent labelling of AMOs enabled us to restrict our analyses to growth cones known to contain AMOs (see Supplementary Fig. Fluorescent labelling of AMOs enabled us to restrict our analyses to growth cones known to contain AMOs (see Supplementary Fig. The β-actin QIF signal was significantly lower in AMO-containing growth cones than in control growth cones (23%; Fig. BDNF has been shown to increase protein synthesis in neurons27 and elicits protein synthesis-dependent turning responses in Xenopus spinal neurons7. 