This report summarizes the experience of using PROMIS and legacy measures of symptoms and functioning in the same RCT with a clinical sample of advanced breast cancer patients and a community sample of their friend or family caregivers. Using the shortest available forms of PROMIS measures, the conclusions about the differences between trial arms were very similar to the conclusions obtained using the legacy measures, most of which were longer than the 4-item PROMIS forms. Different conclusions were obtained for patient and caregiver depression: legacy measures indicated the efficacy of reflexology, while the PROMIS depression measure did not. Different conclusions were obtained for patient and caregiver depression: legacy measures indicated the efficacy of reflexology, while the PROMIS depression measure did not. The titles of PROMIS measures of social functioning reflect the conceptualization of this construct by PROMIS developers as involvement in, and satisfaction with, one’s usual social roles in life’s situation or activities.3,5 This conceptual division into “ability to participate” and “satisfaction with participation” make the content of the PROMIS measures of social function somewhat different from the SF-36 social functioning subscale considered in this study as a legacy measure. Greater responsiveness and conceptual content, not limited to negative affect and relevant for cancer survivors and their caregivers, strongly support the use of the legacy CES-D and the SF-36 mental health versus PROMIS depression 4-item short form in the populations reflected by this trial’s patient and caregiver samples. Present findings also indicate that the issue may not lie solely with length, but also in the content. Present findings also indicate that the issue may not lie solely with length, but also in the content. The one-item MDASI distress item for patients demonstrated similar responsiveness to the longer CES-D and SF-36 mental health subscale, and the MDASI item of sadness yielded the same conclusion as a longer PROMIS depression measure reflecting negative affect. However, because several legacy tools produced the same result which differed from the results obtained using PROMIS depression, and because this finding was seen in both patient and caregiver samples, it is likely that the legacy measures performed better in capturing intervention effects on depression. This finding is further supported by reductions seen in other patient symptoms and literature documenting associations of depression with other cancer-related symptoms.40These findings apply to the reflexology intervention and not necessarily to other interventions. Despite these limitations, the study was unique in using both established legacy and newer PROMIS measures in a single clinical trial. Despite these limitations, the study was unique in using both established legacy and newer PROMIS measures in a single clinical trial. Despite these limitations, the study was unique in using both established legacy and newer PROMIS measures in a single clinical trial. The exception is depressive symptoms, where the longer legacy measures have the advantage of covering not just negative affect, but also mood and somatic concerns that are often present in cancer populations. The legacy measures used in the initial PROMIS development and validation studies2–5 included the Medical Outcomes Study Short Form 36 (SF-36), the Center for Epidemiologic Studies-Depression (CESD) scale, the State Anxiety scale, and the Pittsburgh Sleep Symptom Questionnaire-Insomnia (PSSQ_I). The attractiveness of PROMIS measures for this study stemmed from the ability to use these measures with both the clinical sample of breast cancer patients and the general population sample of their friend or family caregivers. Caring for the patient often has negative consequences to the caregiver’s family resources and health,15 and the added responsibility of reflexology delivery could have increased caregiver burden and worsened caregiver health. We therefore asked, “Do PROMIS and legacy measures yield comparable findings when evaluating trial results for the patient-caregiver dyads?” The results of the primary analysis are reported elsewhere.19 An exploratory aim of the parent trial used a different set of measures for patient and caregiver symptoms and functioning to contribute to the growing evidence of psychometric properties of PROMIS measures by comparing their responsiveness to that of legacy measures. The sample size of N = 256 dyads was set in the parent trialwhere patient’s symptom severity index was the primary outcome. The majority (70%) of the caregivers agreed to be interviewed about their own health outcomes. T-scores for the US general population were calculated, with higher scores reflecting better outcomes. In this report, five of the eight attributes were analyzed: physical functioning, bodily pain, vitality, mental health, and social role functioning. This report compares patient symptoms of pain, fatigue, disturbed sleep, sadness, and distress severity to the five related domains of PROMIS Profile v1.0: pain, fatigue, sleep disturbance, and depression.Pittsburgh Sleep Symptom Questionnaire-Insomnia (PSSQ_I)24(caregivers only because patients rated insomnia in the MDASI) is a 13-item instrument rating insomnia. This report examined sleep quality (range 0–15) and sleep interference (range 8–40) in relation to the PROMIS Profile v1.0 sleep disturbance domain score.Center for Epidemiologic Studies-Depression CES-D25(patients and caregivers) measures depressive symptomatology. This report examined sleep quality (range 0–15) and sleep interference (range 8–40) in relation to the PROMIS Profile v1.0 sleep disturbance domain score.Center for Epidemiologic Studies-Depression CES-D25(patients and caregivers) measures depressive symptomatology. Higher scores indicate greater anxiety. Medical records provided data on patient disease and treatment.1.4.1 |Data analysisThe comparisons of PROMIS and legacy measures were conducted separately for the patient sample and the caregiver sample. General linear models for this analysis included trial arm and baseline values as covariates. Such ceiling effects were not seen on the legacy measures of depression for either the patient or the caregiver sample. Such ceiling effects were not seen on the legacy measures of depression for either the patient or the caregiver sample. In the patient sample, the conclusions about intervention effects were similar using PROMIS and legacy measures of pain. Significant differences between trial arms were seen using PROMIS and legacy measures of pain severity with the effect size of one third of the standard deviation or higher. Also consistently, PROMIS and legacy measures indicated sizable significant effects of reflexology for the management of anxiety among patients, not among the caregivers, and no intervention effects on sleep for either patients or caregivers. 