Because of their settling dynamics, these attractors would have pattern completion properties, i.e. Because of their settling dynamics, these attractors would have pattern completion properties, i.e. Because of their settling dynamics, these attractors would have pattern completion properties, i.e. Because of their settling dynamics, these attractors would have pattern completion properties, i.e. Because of their settling dynamics, these attractors would have pattern completion properties, i.e. Direct support for the ensemble hypothesis came from the development of optical methods to image and optically manipulate neural circuits with single cell resolution. Direct support for the ensemble hypothesis came from the development of optical methods to image and optically manipulate neural circuits with single cell resolution. Very similar results were found in awake animals: neuronal ensembles were prevalent in both visually-evoked and spontaneous activity, and evoked ensembles resembled spontaneous ones [16]. These holographic “piano” methods are critical because they have single cell resolution and neuronal ensembles are built with specific sets of neurons that occupy the same territories, so one needs two-photon precision to stimulate the neurons from one ensemble selectively, without activating cells that belong to other ones. These holographic “piano” methods are critical because they have single cell resolution and neuronal ensembles are built with specific sets of neurons that occupy the same territories, so one needs two-photon precision to stimulate the neurons from one ensemble selectively, without activating cells that belong to other ones. Although the idea of recalling a learned behavior by the stimulation of single neurons is not new [22,23], the precise targeting of visualized neurons paves the road to understand circuit mechanisms underlying different behaviors with single cell precision. Analyzing these matrices, one can explore the existence of neuronal ensembles, defining the population activity at a given time as a vector, which constitutes a computation unit (Figure 1b). This type of neuronal ensemble analysis has generated new insights and interpretations for neuronal population data [19••,20••,24,26,27•,28,29]. This type of neuronal ensemble analysis has generated new insights and interpretations for neuronal population data [19••,20••,24,26,27•,28,29]. Thus, the effect of single cell stimulation on behavioral performance could be dependent not only on the training, but also on the task demand or even on the brain state [5]. Although the mechanisms underlying these behavioral effects of single neurons activation are still under investigation, these experiments altogether demonstrate that holographic optogenetics can be used to manipulate ensembles, proving a causal relation between ensemble activity, perception and learned behaviors. Thus, they can be viewed as an initial confirmation of proposals of reverberating chains, assemblies, attractors or synfire chains [6,8,9,11]. While these experiments have been performed in mouse primary visual cortex, the presence of coactive ensembles of neurons that are causally related to behavior has also been observed in cnidar-ians [37], given credence to the idea that, like the genetic code, some basic features of the neural code could be similar across phyla. Thus, echoing a proper Kuhnian paradigm shift [38], the new theory (the ensemble hypothesis) can explain the older one (the neuron doctrine), subsuming it.A lot more needs to be done to explore the role of ensembles in the neural code. To capture all the ensembles, a dream experiment for many neuroscientists, and one that inspired the BRAIN initiative [39], would be to visualize the spatial and temporal dynamics of every neuron involved in a behavior and then have the ability to precisely manipulate targeted neurons with single cell resolution. The development of all-optical reading and writing of neuronal activity with holographic “piano” experiments and two-photon calcium imaging has enabled an initial exploration of ensemble function, and has moved experimental capabilities one step forward toward such dream [17,35,40]. Finally, the identification of neuron subtypes belonging to neuronal ensembles in conjunction with trascriptomics [45] will be necessary to target molecularly identified subtypes of neurons with holographic optoge-netics and to understand their role in functional microcircuits across brain areas.The neuronal ensemble hypothesis could have significant repercussions for translational neuroscience and medicine. Thus, to recreate a percept or a representation, the activation of specific neurons that recall neuronal ensembles in sequential order might be enough, instead of targeting hundreds or thousands of neurons. Such single cell methods could be used to manipulate memories or circuit states in mental or neurological diseases. The characterization of the circuit mechanisms underlying changes in cortical neuronal ensembles related to memory and behavior could be extended to different brain regions to define biomarkers of population activity to diagnose and intervene during pathological states [5]. 