However, we use random crops as a data augmentation step during training, which introduces variation in segmentations, and therefore, we expect our models to be robust to minor variability of segmentations. However, we use random crops as a data augmentation step during training, which introduces variation in segmentations, and therefore, we expect our models to be robust to minor variability of segmentations. However, we use random crops as a data augmentation step during training, which introduces variation in segmentations, and therefore, we expect our models to be robust to minor variability of segmentations. In conclusion, we developed LungNet, a CNN that uses pretreatment CT imaging for prediction of lung cancer overall survival and nodule malignancy. However, to date, the lack of large publicly available clinical imaging cohorts with follow-up data has been an impediment the development and validation of CNN-based models. Study cohortsThis multi-institutional study was approved by the institutional review board of each participating institution, and conducted in compliance with the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA), with all patient records deidentified before analysis. The subjects in Cohort 1 were selected from a pool of NSCLC patients referred for surgical treatment between 2008 and 2012 with diagnostic CT performed prior to surgical procedures. Cohort 3 comprised patients with confirmed primary tumors who received surgery. Cohort 3 comprised patients with confirmed primary tumors who received surgery. The CNN architecture incorporates three 3D convolutional layers with size 16×3×3 along with a 3D max-pooling layer with kernel size = 2, stride = 2. Three fully connected layers with decreasing sizes of feature vectors (i.e. Recall that in the usual Cox Proportional-hazard model, this is assumed to be a linear function of the input covariates; here, it can be a highly non-linear function represented by the CNN. Cox Proportional-hazard loss53 and cross-entropy loss54 functions were used for the survival prediction and the malignancy prediction tasks, respectively. Cox Proportional-hazard loss53 and cross-entropy loss54 functions were used for the survival prediction and the malignancy prediction tasks, respectively. We used a cyclic learning rate policy55 (triangular2) for training, and continued the training for 100 epochs with no early stopping. For the survival prediction task, Cox regression loss was used for training.Regarding the task of malignancy prediction, we kept the same network architecture, but used cross-entropy loss for training. Description of all features and their feature classes are provided in the Supplement S1. The l1 penalty tends to assign non-zero weights to a small number of features and set the weights of remaining features to zero. Next, we used a two-color scheme to refer to high risk (i.e. 1), we also show that a model pretrained on a survival prediction task can be useful on the nodule malignancy prediction task. 1), we also show that a model pretrained on a survival prediction task can be useful on the nodule malignancy prediction task. 1), we also show that a model pretrained on a survival prediction task can be useful on the nodule malignancy prediction task. 1), we also show that a model pretrained on a survival prediction task can be useful on the nodule malignancy prediction task. 1), we also show that a model pretrained on a survival prediction task can be useful on the nodule malignancy prediction task. ROC were generated using classification probabilities of malignant labels versus benign labels of total number of testing images with Python scikit-learn library (v 0.19.1). ROC curves were compared statistically according to Hanley and McNeil method31. Data AvailabilityCohort 1 (Stanford Hospital, n=129): The data is publicly available on The Cancer Imaging Archive (TCIA) at: http://doi.org/10.7937/K9/TCIA.2017.7hs46erv63Cohort 2 (H. Lee Moffitt Cancer Center and Research Institute, n=185): A portion of the data (54/185) is available from TCIA at: Code AvailabilityCode for the LungNet is available at https://doi.org/10.24433/CO.0612256.v168. In the first phase, with round robin training and evaluation, LungNet achieved validation CI of 0.62 on cohorts 1, 2 and 3. The groups showed significant separation in terms of Kaplan-Meier curves for all three cohorts, with two-sided log-rank P values: 2.59e-03, 7.82e-05, 1.10e-05 on cohorts 1, 2 and 3, respectively. The clinical features only model, by comparison, achieved much poorer stratification, with log-rank P values: 7.92e-03, 9.98e-03, and 6.90e-01 on cohorts 1, 2 and 3, respectively (Fig. Note that our tasks of survival prediction and malignancy prediction are likely strongly related to each other; however the outputs (hazard ratio for survival prediction, class probability for malignancy prediction) and loss metrics used for training are very different (Cox regression loss for survival, cross-entropy loss for malignancy prediction). Note that our tasks of survival prediction and malignancy prediction are likely strongly related to each other; however the outputs (hazard ratio for survival prediction, class probability for malignancy prediction) and loss metrics used for training are very different (Cox regression loss for survival, cross-entropy loss for malignancy prediction). Note that our tasks of survival prediction and malignancy prediction are likely strongly related to each other; however the outputs (hazard ratio for survival prediction, class probability for malignancy prediction) and loss metrics used for training are very different (Cox regression loss for survival, cross-entropy loss for malignancy prediction). Note that our tasks of survival prediction and malignancy prediction are likely strongly related to each other; however the outputs (hazard ratio for survival prediction, class probability for malignancy prediction) and loss metrics used for training are very different (Cox regression loss for survival, cross-entropy loss for malignancy prediction). Additionally, we evaluated LungNet using transfer learning and we demonstrated that pre-training a model for prognostication improves the performance of the malignancy prediction task. 3D variants of these networks require even more data, and even large datasets such as UCF-101 (>13,000 action instances), HMDB-51 (>7,500 videos) and ActivityNet (>28,000 action instances) may not be sufficient to train them from scratch 39, These are typically not available for most biomedical applications. Transfer learning can be an effective tool for addressing the dearth of data. Transfer learning within the ambit of medical images can, however, be beneficial. In our work, we did not consider the problem of nodule detection and segmentation, which has been extensively studied in the literature in recent years 42–46, instead relying instead on segmentations done by radiologists. In addition, we show that the model pretrained on the survival prediction task can also be useful for the malignancy prediction task as well. In addition, we show that the model pretrained on the survival prediction task can also be useful for the malignancy prediction task as well. In addition, we show that the model pretrained on the survival prediction task can also be useful for the malignancy prediction task as well. In addition, we show that the model pretrained on the survival prediction task can also be useful for the malignancy prediction task as well. Of course, the predicted hazard ratios can be used to stratify patients into high and low risk groups and the corresponding KM curves showed significant separation for every cohort. Overall, the images-only LungNet model shows consistent performance across the different cohorts, outperforming a clinical only model; however, in cohorts where the clinical variables are strongly predictive of survival, they can be effectively incorporated into LungNet to achieve better performance for prognostication than a clinical only model. Currently, molecular profiles are used for lung cancer prognostication48–51. Currently, molecular profiles are used for lung cancer prognostication48–51. Currently, molecular profiles are used for lung cancer prognostication48–51. Thus, quantitative imaging can complement molecular phenotypes obtained from biopsies, and in situations where biopsies are not possible, quantitative imaging can be an alternative. For example, treatment may be intensified for high risk patients with higher radiation doses or additional cycles of chemotherapy, while de-intensifying treatment for low risk patients. 