The change in binge drinking at time t, however, is also associated with the change in FO at the same time t, showing a cross sectional relationship between the change variables as well. The cross-lag mixed effects models employed addresses whether there is a group level generalized relationship between these change scores during a dynamic developmental period for these adolescents. In addition, this observed association holds for tobacco, marijuana, hard drug use, and both overall and binge alcohol use, even when relevant covariates are included in the model. These results contribute to existing literature showing a positive bidirectional relationship between FO and SU in youth (Bolland, 2003; Carvajal et al , 1998; Chua, et al , 2015; Donovan, et al  2015; Hawkins, et al  1992; Holmes and Kim-Spoon, 2016; Koehn et al , 2012; Mathis et al , 2009; May et al , 2015; Peters et al , 2005; Wilson et al , 2005). In a longitudinal study, Barnett et al (2013) found that future time perspective (a measure similar to our planning measure) was associated with decreased SU over two time points in a sample ofhigh riskyouth at an alternative high school (Barnett, et al , 2013). Holmes et al (2016) also found that FO has a positive influence on SU over time in a small sample of typically developing youth with high sense of religion (Holmes and Kim-Spoon, 2016). Beyond individual FO, Alm and Laftman (2016) showed that classroom communities with high FO influence person level decreases in alcohol use (Alm and Laftman, 2016). Beyond individual FO, Alm and Laftman (2016) showed that classroom communities with high FO influence person level decreases in alcohol use (Alm and Laftman, 2016). However, we could hypothesize that SU leads to apathy or blunts motivation towards future planning, as it does with psychosocial maturity more generally (Chassin et al , 2010). However, we could hypothesize that SU leads to apathy or blunts motivation towards future planning, as it does with psychosocial maturity more generally (Chassin et al , 2010). However, we could hypothesize that SU leads to apathy or blunts motivation towards future planning, as it does with psychosocial maturity more generally (Chassin et al , 2010). However, we could hypothesize that SU leads to apathy or blunts motivation towards future planning, as it does with psychosocial maturity more generally (Chassin et al , 2010). However, we could hypothesize that SU leads to apathy or blunts motivation towards future planning, as it does with psychosocial maturity more generally (Chassin et al , 2010). However, we could hypothesize that SU leads to apathy or blunts motivation towards future planning, as it does with psychosocial maturity more generally (Chassin et al , 2010). Next steps would be to evaluate individual trajectories to further explore the nuances of this relationship and to use a FO centered intervention to assess an effect size potentially attributable to such an intervention. We hypothesize that greater increases in FO over time will be related to slower increases in SU over time. Data setData for these secondary analyses are from the Pathways to Desistance Study (“Pathways” study), a longitudinal study of serious juvenile offenders in two locales (Philadelphia, PA, and Phoenix, AZ) as they make the transition from adolescence into early adulthood. Data setData for these secondary analyses are from the Pathways to Desistance Study (“Pathways” study), a longitudinal study of serious juvenile offenders in two locales (Philadelphia, PA, and Phoenix, AZ) as they make the transition from adolescence into early adulthood. Data setData for these secondary analyses are from the Pathways to Desistance Study (“Pathways” study), a longitudinal study of serious juvenile offenders in two locales (Philadelphia, PA, and Phoenix, AZ) as they make the transition from adolescence into early adulthood. Data setData for these secondary analyses are from the Pathways to Desistance Study (“Pathways” study), a longitudinal study of serious juvenile offenders in two locales (Philadelphia, PA, and Phoenix, AZ) as they make the transition from adolescence into early adulthood. The rationale for the study is presented in Mulvey et al  (2004) and the details of study operations are presented in Schubert et al  (2004). The rationale for the study is presented in Mulvey et al  (2004) and the details of study operations are presented in Schubert et al  (2004). The data used in these analyses were available from the Inter-university Consortium for Political and Social Research hosted by the University of Michigan (ICPSR) (https://www.icpsr.umich.edu/icpsrweb/ICPSR/series/00260. Table 1 shows participant characteristics. We used confirmatory factor analysis to assess the soundness of a composite measure of mean scores and the fatalism measure as a representation of FO. The items contributing to the subscale indicate the adolescent’s view of the importance of future achievement in the domains of education, work, and family, and avoidance of legal system involvement. The aspiration score mean for the sample at baseline was 3.15 [94%CI: 2.19, 4.12] with a Cronbach alpha of 0.67.Expectations:The PCFS measure also contains an expectations scale. Youth answered six questions in the same domains referenced above on a five-point Likert scale regarding their perceived likelihood of achieving successful outcomes in each domain (e.g. Youth answered six questions in the same domains referenced above on a five-point Likert scale regarding their perceived likelihood of achieving successful outcomes in each domain (e.g. This value was taken as a relative indicator of the adolescent’s view regarding overall future prospects, and has been found to be salient in this population and in other investigations with this sample (Piquero, 2014). This scale includes elements from the Life Orientation Task (Scheier and Carver, 1985), the Zimbardo Time Perspective Scale (Zimbardo, 1990) and the Consideration of Future Consequences Scale (Strathman et al , 1994). The identity and self-reliance subscales of the Psychosocial Maturity Index (Greenberger et al , 1975) and the impulsiveness subscale of the Weinberger Adjustment Inventory (Feldman and Weinberger, 1994; Weinberger and Schwartz, 1990) were used for this purpose. SU data were normalized using methods similar to what was described in Chassin et al (2009), including transformation of the cigarette-smoking outcome using 4(y4−1) in order to normalize the distribution of those particular data(Chassin, et al , 2009). In an influential paper, Nurmi (1989) described future orientation (FO) as a multidimensional process that characterizes a person’s personal goals as well as their thoughts about how and whether those goals are achievable (Nurmi, 1989a; Nurmi, 1991). We used this technique to determine whether there was a quantitatively discernible and bi-directional relationship between the variables. (Husted et al , 2012). (Husted et al , 2012). (Husted et al , 2012). (Husted et al , 2012). We repeated the above models adjusting for age, gender, data collection site, proportion of time out of a locked facility during the recall period, and highest parental education; known influences of substance use and in line with other studies of SU in JIY (Chassin, et al , 2009).While there are 1,354 subjects in the original data set, we took different sub-samples for each model based on completeness of data. Of those reporting hard drug use, most reported using between one and three different hard drugs (64.3%) sometime in the past, and about 61% reported using hard drugs in the prior 6 months. Table 4 shows model intercepts and confidence intervals for beta coefficients for unadjusted and adjusted models.Marijuana, hard drug, and alcohol use including binge drinking follow the same patterns as those of tobacco. Figure 4 shows the results of any alcohol use and Figure 5 shows models of binge drinking and FO. 