Centers reviewed their epilepsy surgery research databases for clinical, surgical, and imaging patient characteristics for three milestone years (1991, 2001, and 2011). Data collected included age at surgery, gender, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings, histopathologic results, and the number and type of epilepsy surgeries. When a randomized clinical trial compared surgical to medical therapy for drug-resistant seizures, patients with TLE were the chosen study subjects.1 Major epilepsy advocacy groups declare TLE as the most common form of localization-related epilepsy.2 The bulk of epilepsy research funding focuses around TLE in general, and m-TLE in particular.3 Against this landscape dominated by a perception of TLE as the central driver of the drug-resistant epilepsy burden, multiple recent anecdotal reports and informal surveys4–6 have implied a decline in the practice of resective surgery in the context of TLE. Using this more detailed dataset, we performed multivariate Poisson regression for MTS rates adjusting for center. Although the most productive year for MTS surgeries varied then by center, overall, the nine centers surveyed performed 48% (95% confidence interval [CI] −27.3% to −67.4%) fewer such surgeries in 2011 compared to either 1991 or 2001, whichever was higher. The practice of m-TLE surgery is decreasing in major surgical epilepsy centers:Potential explanations are the following: 1) performed in our centers strongly argues against this possibility and favors a true drop in practice. In fact, this drop in absolute numbers is even more striking, considering that it progressively decreased over time, even though each one of these surgical centers was becoming more established and gaining in reputation as a referral center.The practice of m-TLE-related surgery is indeed decreasing in major epilepsy centers, but this is merely a reflection of varying referral patterns with “simpler” m-TLE-related surgeries occurring in local hospitals instead. 1E), reflecting varying comfort levels and opinions about appropriateness of surgery in this challenging patient population that may obtain substantial benefit from early surgery.32The use of invasive EEG evaluations that do not lead to subsequent brain resections is increasing (Fig. This variability in practice and variability in overall presenting patient distribution over time is beyond our capability to quantify on a center by center basis. This variability in practice and variability in overall presenting patient distribution over time is beyond our capability to quantify on a center by center basis. This variability in practice and variability in overall presenting patient distribution over time is beyond our capability to quantify on a center by center basis. This variability in practice and variability in overall presenting patient distribution over time is beyond our capability to quantify on a center by center basis. This variability in practice and variability in overall presenting patient distribution over time is beyond our capability to quantify on a center by center basis. Such an idea is supported by observations already reported in multiple healthcare systems, including on the national level in the United States using the NIS database,7 in the United Kingdom where the number of children receiving surgery for epilepsy had increased annually up to, and declined after, the establishment of Children’s Epilepsy Surgery Service centers,34 and in Germany where an epidemiological analysis of 2,812 patients who had TLE surgery between 1988 and 2008 showed an early increase in the proportion of patients with MTS during the first few years studied, only to subsequently demonstrate an increase in the age and duration of epilepsy in patients with MTS despite stable overall surgical numbers over time interpreted to suggest a reduction in incidence of MTS.17 Implications of findings for future researchWhile debating the causes of our findings is important, it is critical to advance the discussion further and tackle their implications. Regardless of the cause, our data suggest that m-TLE related surgeries no longer account for the major burden of surgical epilepsy in major established epilepsy centers in the developed world, and an increasing number of patients with complex nonlesional epilepsy are being assessed/undergoing surgery. Thorough and systematic epidemiological research to better understand and improve the utilization of epilepsy surgery, for ALL potential surgical candidates. Thorough and systematic epidemiological research to better understand and improve the utilization of epilepsy surgery, for ALL potential surgical candidates. Thorough and systematic epidemiological research to better understand and improve the utilization of epilepsy surgery, for ALL potential surgical candidates. This variation together with the increase in the number of invasive evaluations without subsequent resections highlight a need to improve patient selection, presurgical evaluation protocols, and outcomes of care in this complex surgical population.Expanding the scope of clinical and basic science research studying extra-temporal epilepsy given its growing contribution to the surgical epilepsy burden. When adjusted for center, there was no overall reduction in the number of epilepsy surgeries per center (dashed line) over two decades at these centers. When adjusted for center, there was no overall reduction in the number of epilepsy surgeries per center (dashed line) over two decades at these centers. When adjusted for center, there was an overall increase in the proportion of electrode implants not leading to resection of about 0.7% annually. When adjusted for center, there was an overall increase in the proportion of electrode implants not leading to resection of about 0.7% annually. When adjusted for center, there was an overall increase in the proportion of electrode implants not leading to resection of about 0.7% annually. 