The medium was replaced daily for up to 5 days.Inhibitor and Purified Fibronectin TreatmentsCells maintained under the indicated culturing conditions were treated with 7.5 μM FAK inhibitor III (FAKi), 2.5 μM Y15 (also referred to as FAK inhibitor 14), 25 μg/ml RGD peptide, and either 320 ng or 5.0 μg of purified fibronectin. A linear sucrose gradient was assembled on top of the mixture by sequentially layering 700 μl of 15 fractions (i.e. FM1-43FX dye (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was then added to the partially clarified medium to a final concentration of 5 μg/ml for 30 minutes. The membranes were blocked with 10% BSA in 20 mM Tris, 135 mM NaCl, and 0.02% Tween 20 (TBST) for 30 minutes, and then incubated with the indicated primary antibodies diluted in TBST overnight. The slides were permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 diluted in PBS, blocked with 10% BSA diluted in PBS, and incubated with an Oct3/4 antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and a Nanog antibody (Abcam) diluted in 5% BSA in PBS at a 1:200 dilution, for 2 hours. All images were captured using IPLABS software (BD Biosciences) and processed using ImageJ software.Embryo Collection and Blastocyst Outgrowth AssaysFemale FVB/N mice, between 8 and 20 weeks of age (Jackson Laboratory), were super-ovulated by injecting pregnant mare’s serum gonadotropin (PMSG) and human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG). The concentration of cDNA was measured using a NanoDrop Spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the cDNA samples were subjected to RT-PCRESC Microinjection into Mouse BlastocystsFemale B6(Cg)-Tyrc-2J/J (B6-albino) mice, between 8 and 20 weeks of age (Jackson Laboratory), were super-ovulated by injecting pregnant mare’s serum gonadotropin (PMSG) and human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG). In contrast, differentiated mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) showed little or no detectable expression of these proteins, with the exception of Klf4; whereas, as expected, they expressed the fibroblast marker, Thy1 (Rege and Hagood, 2006). The ESC-derived MVs and exosomes were further resolved by sucrose density gradient sedimentation. We also detected fibronectin in the sucrose gradient fractions that contained MVs and exosomes, i.e., in the intermediate-density fractions (Figure 6B). 