Specifically, five proteins: EGFP, Venus, mTagBFP2, mIFP, and TagRFP657, can be easily utilized (EGFP or Venus, mTagBFP2 and either mIFP or TagRFP657). For example, if EGFP must be used, the most optimal combination would be EGFP, mTagBFP2, and mTagRFP657. These are similar to mApple and Venus (respectively) and while they are reportedly bright, utility in multicolor panels would need to be determined. Similarly, EYFP was also included because it is a legacy reagent. Cell CultureMouse Kidney Epithelial 4 (mK4) cells were a kind gift from S. Steven Potter (CCHMC). 54 μl of Transit LT1 were added dropwise to 600 μl of OptiMem, and incubated for five minutes before DNA and Transit mix was combined and added to a 10cm plate with 4 million 293T cells. Cells were considered selected after >95% of non-transduced control mK4 cells plated to similar density as the transduced mK4 cells were dead. Instrument setup and QC was performed by core facility staff per manufacturer instructions. Cells were treated with trypsin and plated on a #1.5 cover-glass bottom 48 well plate. Flow Cytometry and Data AnalysisFlow cytometry was conducted using a BD LSRFortessa located in the CCHMC Research Flow Cytometry Core (RFCC). Cells were examined via confocal microscope (Fig 1A) by plating into individual wells of a #1.5 cover-glass bottom 48 well plate in indicator-dye-free media. As expected, each well containing transduced cells displayed detectable fluorescence (Table 1). Knock-in gene-expression or fusion-protein reporters can greatly improve the identification of cell populations where conventional surface marker profiling fails. While dTomato is detected in a separate channel than mCherry, there is significant overlap and it is preferable to use dTomato and not both. Alternative filter selections made the detection of individual signals from EGFP-Venus and EGFP-EYFP signals co-expressing cells possible (Fig 2B). As expected, separation of Venus and EYFP when they are co-expressed is not possible. 