However, Cited2−/− eyes were predominantly featured by excessive and disorganized vasculature in the developing vitreous that was positive for expression CD31 (Fig. In this report, we show for the first time that Cited2 deficiency results in abnormal corneal-lenticular stalk formation and vitreous hypercellularity consisting of aberrant vasculature in the developing eye. In α-TN4-1 cells, Cited2 overexpression significantly increased LE9-P0 reporter activity (Fig. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) was then carried out to test whether Cited2 is physically present on the Pax6 ectoderm enhancer and the P0 promoter region using chromatin prepared from α-TN4-1 cells. 6E, Cited2−/−;Pax6− mouse embryos reproducibly displayed corneal-lenticular stalk formation (n=2) (Fig. These data provide direct evidence that decreased Pax6 expression is indeed responsible for the corneal-lenticular stalk formation in Cited2-deficient embryos. 7C), whereas no lacZ staining was detected in Cited2flox/flox;Le-Cre−control eyes (Fig. 7K), and the latter was confirmed by immunostaining for α smooth muscle actin, which labels the pericytes that stabilize the vessels (Fig. Proliferation assays did not reveal any obvious changes in Cited2-deficient embryos compared with their wild-type littermate controls. lacZ expression was detected by X-Gal (Roche) staining and was performed on 1% paraformaldehyde-fixed eye sections according to standard methods. TUNEL assayCryosections were collected from 10.5 dpc embryos after fixation in 4% paraformaldehyde and processed for the TUNEL assay according to the manufacturer’s instruction (Chemicon). Relative luciferase activity was calculated by dividing firefly luciferase activity by Renilla luciferase activity. Cited2 expression was detected in the surface ectoderm at 9.5 dpc (Fig. The corneal-lenticular stalk was further examined by immunostaining of E-cadherin. In addition, a distinctive endothelial layer on the posterior side of the cornea developed in wild-type eyes by 15.5 dpc (see Fig. These initial in vitro studies underscore the potential roles of Cited2 in different biological processes. 