This could suggest that hypoglycemia early in the postoperative period may not have the same clinical implication as that in the medical ICU. Finally, treatment improvements and initiatives would affect outcomes positively, while infection outbreaks would have a negative effect. Using a standardized institutional protocol and targeting a moderate BG range in early post–cardiac surgery patients maintained BG levels within target range for the SH and diabetes groups. Insulin aspart was used as bolus insulin for meals and correction in both groups. Deep sternal wound infections were defined according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention definition30 and collected by the Department of Infection Control & Epidemiology. This finding has been reproduced in several other observational studies of mixed ICU populations,12,13 studies on post–acute myocardial infarction patients,14 and those on total parenteral nutrition administration.15 Additionally, several prospective studies have shown patients with SH to have improved morbidity and mortality, as well as better BG control.16,17 These studies suggest that elevated BG levels affect patients with both diabetes and SH, and that appropriate treatment may improve outcomes. Patients with left ventricular assist devices have prolonged hospitalizations, and this group was excluded from the surgical LOS analysis. The variables considered to be potential confounders from the univariate analysis were included in multiple regression models and then removed individually to examine the change in estimate of the exposure. A P value of ≤ 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Mortality OutcomesMortality rates within the first 30 days after surgery were similar between the 2 groups (3.4% for patients with diabetes and 2.3% for patients with SH; P = 0.2), as were mortality rates at 90 days (4.6% for patients with diabetes and 3.5% for patients with SH; P = 0.3). Improvements in DSWI and mortality rates in patients with diabetes by lowering BG targets to < 200 mg/dL were first described by the Portland group.1 An initial large trial16 in surgical ICU patients reported a significantly lower rate of morbidity and mortality by targeting euglycemia (BG, 80–110 mg/dL) compared with standard care. However, after multivariate analysis, the difference in mean surgical LOS was no longer significant. Additionally, fewer patients with diabetes (only 20%–30%) spent their time in the < 145 mg/dL BG range, unlike our study, in which > 50% of the BG levels of patients with diabetes were within target range. These contribute to the variable surgical LOS in our cohort. 