NADPH oxidase, a multiunit enzyme comprised of membrane bound and cytoplasmic components. These sections were collected on grids and counter-stained with Reynold’s lead citrate and uranyl acetate prior to examination using a Philips Tecnai Biotwin transmission electron microscope connected with a digital camera (Advanced Microscopy Techniques, software version 3.2). Data AnalysisData are expressed as mean±SEM. Two-group comparisons were analyzed by the two-tailed t test for independent samples. Multiple comparisons were evaluated by ANOVA and Tukey’s tests, as appropriate. Recent data in NOX2-null mice have implicated NADPH oxidase-derived ROS (Kishida et al , 2006), but functional evidence linking NMDA receptor activity to NOX2-dependent ROS production was lacking. Arterial blood pressure and blood gases were carefully monitored and maintained in the physiological range. NO, in turn, activates sGC increasing cGMP production, which leads to activation of PKG and increased NOX2 activity. Irrespective of the mechanisms of PKG activation, our findings identify NO-cGMP-PKG signaling as the critical link between NMDA receptors and NOX2-dependent ROS production.Concentrations of NMDA (100–300μM) higher than those used in the present study (40μM) can trigger ROS production from other sources, especially mitochondria, (Dugan et al , 1995b; Reynolds and Hastings, 1995; Bindokas et al , 1996). Although the mechanisms by which PKG activates NADPH oxidase have not been elucidated, increasing evidence points to PKG-dependent activation of the small GTPase Rac1, an essential step in NADPH oxidase activation. After resuspension in lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.1, 300mM sucrose, 1mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 1mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 5 M leupeptin, 1 M pepstatin A, and 10 g/ml aprotinin), cells were disrupted on ice by sonication and centrifuged (10,000g for 10 min at 4 °C). Parallel reactions included 100 units of superoxide dismutase and results are reported as superoxide dismutase inhibitable light emission (RLU). Parallel reactions included 100 units of superoxide dismutase and results are reported as superoxide dismutase inhibitable light emission (RLU). and their brain tissue fixed by vascular perfusion with 3.75% acrolein and 2% paraformaldehyde in phosphate buffer (PB)(Milner and Drake, 2001). For NOX2 immunoreactivity, sections were incubated sequentially in: (a) anti-goat immunoglobulin (IgG) conjugated to biotin (Vector, Burlingame, CA) diluted 1/400 in TS containing 0.1% BSA, (b) peroxidase-avidin complex (Vectastain Elite kit) in TS, and (c) 3,3′-diaminobenzidine (Aldrich Chemical, Milwaukee, WI) and hydrogen peroxide in TS. Sections were rinsed in PBS, post-fixed for 10 min in 2% glutaraldehyde and rinsed again. 