A method that would enable not only the non-selective identification of the P450 enzymes present in diseased tissue, but also the quantification of expression levels relative to that of surrounding normal tissue, would provide invaluable information regarding the metabolic fate of the selected drugs and hence the outcome of therapy. These techniques have significant limitations: not only do they require pre-selection of the P450 enzymes to be investigated, so that if an unknown or unexpected P450 were present in a sample it would be overlooked, but they are unable to provide reliable quantitative information. We have demonstrated in a separate study on these mouse liver microsomes that P450s are exclusively identified in the 45 – 62 kDa molecular weight range. These values can be explained as follows: the P450 molecular weight region of the SDS-PAGE gel was cut into several pairs of bands for analysis (Figure 5); each one of these gel slices contained many proteins. The method has been successfully applied to the analysis of differential P450 expression in the livers of control and TCPOBOP-treated mice grafted with human tumors. Although we saw no evidence of this in the current study, in future work we will exploit 18O labeling to asses the induction of P450s in these mice in response to a panel of other P450 inducing agents. Finally, the proteomic results for two CYP proteins, one found to be up-regulated by TCPOBOP and the other down-regulated, were confirmed by Western blot analysis. Sufficient trypsin solution was added to swell the gel pieces, which were kept on ice for 30 min and then covered with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated at 37 °C overnight. The trypsin was centrifuged between washes at 6000 g, and finally re-suspended in 10 μl trypsin buffer per sample. Three min after sample loading the proportion of solvent B was increased linearly to 35% over 37 min, then to 90% over 5 min; maintained at 90% solvent B for 7 min (wash phase) then re-equilibrated at 96% solvent A, 4% solvent B for 11 min. 