This then leads to the generation of ROS via the sequential activation of Rho proteins, PLC, PKC, and NOX, which then promotes caspase-dependent apoptosis (Figures 6A and 6B). The increased cytosolic Ca2+ concentration stimulates the AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK).66 These events also activate beclin-1, which plays a central role in autophagy by enhancing the formation of phagophores.67,68 We thus tested whether the synthetic transporters of the present study would affect the cytosolic Ca2+ concentration and whether they would induce activation of AMPK and beclin-1.HeLa cells were individually incubated with DSC4P-1, SA-3, 8FC4P, and C4P in the absence and presence of inhibitors of PLC (D609, U73122) and IP3R (2-APB). Collectively, these findings lead us to suggest that 8FC4P and SA-3 promote autophagy by activating AMPK and beclin-1 without inducing Ca2+-mediated apoptosis and that DSC4P-1 does not enhance Ca2+-mediated autophagy (Figure 6C). Particularly noteworthy is the distinct correlation between the effects on autophagy and the model membrane studies. As shown in Figure 1C, both DSC4P-1 and SA-3 proved active in the two assays. As shown in Figure 1C, both DSC4P-1 and SA-3 proved active in the two assays. Whereas DSC4P-1 and SA-3 proved slightly better at H+ or OH− flux than H+/Cl− co-transport, 8FC4P was found to be more effective at H+/Cl− co-transport than H+ or OH– flux. Only DSC4P-1 displayed a moderate selectivity for chloride in both the untreated and BSA-treated experiments.We next sought to confirm the mechanism of transport of DSC4P-1. Ionophore-induced Cl− efflux was measured by an ion-selective electrode (ISE) from KCl-loaded vesicles suspended in an inert external potassium gluconate solution, coupling with either valinomycin (an electrogenic K+ transporter) or monensin (an electroneutral M+/H+ transporter). On this basis, and as shown in Figure 1C, DSC4P-1 appeared to be more effective (by a factor of ~9; see Table 1) at mediating electrogenic Cl– transport than electroneutral H+/Cl− co-transport (or OH−/Cl− exchange).28 In contrast, SA-3 coupled much better to monensin than to valinomycin, supporting the notion that SA-3 acts as an electroneutral cotransporter rather than a chloride uniporter. Taken in concert, these model studies thus serve to underscore that DSC4P-1, SA-3, and 8FC4P all function as ionophores but with distinctively different mechanisms. In contrast, only the electroneutral HCl cotransporters (SA-3 and 8FC4P) can decrease lysosomal H+ and Cl− concentration, leading us to suggest that they may act to disrupt autophagy. These findings are taken as further evidence that the osmotic stress in cells treated with the synthetic ion transporters of this study leads to an enhancement in PLC activation through stimulation of Rho proteins.DAG, produced by activated PLC, is known to stimulate protein kinase C (PKC) and generate phosphorylated PKC through direct binding of DAG to PKC.48–50 Therefore, we sought to determine whether treatment of cells with DSC4P-1, SA-3, and 8FC4P would lead to activation of PKC. 