In the most proximal events of TGF-β signaling, TGF-β binds to TGF-βRI, which results in phosphorylation of TGF-βRII and the formation of a tetrameric complex consisting of two subunits each of TGF-βRI and TGF-βRII. Although these findings suggest that PECAM-1 ITIM phosphorylation and SHP-2 recruitment require TGF-βRI/II-mediated phosphorylation events, it is unlikely that the PECAM-1 ITIMs are directly phosphorylated by TGF-βRI/II. Phosphorylation of the cytoplasmic ITIMs of PECAM-1 depends upon a series of serine and threonine (S/T) and tyrosine (Y) phosphorylation events that support the recruitment and activation of tandem Src homology 2 (SH2) domain-containing phosphatases, such as SHP-2 (15, 16). Homozygosity for the disrupted PECAM1 allele was confirmed for all mice by performing a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay with tail DNA using a forward primer that hybridizes with a sequence within exon 7 (5′-CTGCCAGTCCGAAAATGGAAC-3′) and reverse primers that hybridize with either a sequence within the neomycin cassette (5′-TGCTCCTGCCGAGAAAGTATCC-3′), which amplifies a 626-bp band from the disrupted allele, or a sequence within intron 7 (5′-GGTCAAAAAGGGTTACAACGGC-3′), which amplifies a 387-bp band from the wild-type (WT) allele and a 1546-bp band from the disupted allele. Flow cytometry was used to measure the extent of CFSE dilution and for intracellular staining of granzyme B as described earlier. Membranes were washed three times for 5 min each with 1× TBST, incubated with horse radish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibodies in blocking buffer for 1 hour at room temperature, and then washed three times for 10 min each with 1× TBST. After the blocking buffer was drained off the slides, 100 μl of appropriately diluted primary antibody (1:100 in 0.5% BSA in PBS) was added to slide sections and incubated in a humidified chamber at room temperature for 2 hours. The slides were rinsed twice in PBS, then incubated with 100 μl of diluted secondary antibody (1:200ul in PBS) in a humidified chamber at room temperature for 1 hour. The soaking buffer was removed, the slides were incubated with Duolink Ligase diluted in ligation buffer for 30 min at 37°C and then were washed three times with TBST. Also similar to mouse CD8+ T cells, lower concentrations of TGF-β were required to inhibit IFN-γ production (Fig. Secretion of large amounts of TGF-β helps tumors evade clearance by tumor-reactive T cells, and tumors that secrete large amounts of TGF-β have proven resistant to immune checkpoint therapy (7, 8). 