Similarly, Argys et al  (2001) found that paternity is significantly more likely to be established in states with stronger genetic-testing requirements, and the likelihood of a child-support award is significantly increased in states with higher and more effective child-support enforcement expenditures. TANF and SNAP participants, for example, are required to cooperate with the state OCSE’s attempts to locate nonresident parents, establish paternity and orders, and collect support. Using the Fragile Families data, Mincy and Nepomnyaschy (2005) found no statistically significant difference between the award probabilities of black and white unmarried parents. Therefore, the mothers who were not married but were living together with the fathers are included in the analysis of paternity, but excluded from the analysis of the other three outcomes. The legislative index includes laws covering genetic testing, paternity establishment, numerical guidelines, presumptive guidelines, wage withholdings under delinquency, immediate wage withholdings for new cases, universal wage withholdings, and state income tax fund interception (Huang et al  2004). State Welfare Generosity toward NoncitizensThe 1996 Personal Responsibility and Work Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) denied most types of federally funded means-tested assistance to noncitizens who arrived after 1996, and limited the eligibility of many noncitizens already living in the United States. Some states have extended benefits to legal resident noncitizens and others allow access to legal immigrants only after a period of U.S. residency, but none routinely give benefits to unauthorized immigrants.We use the Urban Institute’s index of state generosity toward noncitizens. As expected, no statistically significant impact of legal status was found on paternity establishment. We expect this number to continue rising rapidly given the fertility trend of immigrants in the United States and the decline in marriage rates. First, we did not have detailed immigration status information, so we could not investigate whether undocumented immigrant parents behave differently than legal immigrant parents. In 2011, nearly 41 percent of all births in the United States in 2009 occurred outside marriage, up from 33.2 percent in 2000 and 18.4 percent in 1980 (Martin et al  2011). 