This error can come from the presence of noise in the body surface potentials not related to the underlying cardiac electrical activity (i.e. The LE was then computed as the Euclidian distance between the ECGI and recorded pacing sites. Figures contain representative data, with Tables containing the complete results available as an online supplement. Here, the ECGI electrograms using the moving average (HFR1) alone (yellow) are slightly smaller than those without filtering (blue) or using a notch filter (HFR3; orange) in the clean data.While certain HFR methods did significantly improve the correlation for both Bordeaux 1 and Utah 1 data compared to no filtering, the improvements were minimal (0.2–2.3% maximum). However, in approximately a ¼ of the beats the activation map was changed drastically in the Noisy data, as seen in Fig. HFR does not impact electrogram reconstruction accuracy, but does impact post-processing to extract features such as activation times. Even a low pass filter above the line noise improved activation reconstruction accuracy, indicating the line noise does not impact activation marker placement.The moving average (HFR2) and 30 Hz low pass (HFR6) filter methods were detrimental to defining activation times for the Utah 2 data set by over-smoothing the reconstructed electrogram (Fig. C.LimitationsThe results presented should be considered in light of limitations. Furthermore, the impact of different lambda values would change with different regularization methods, e.g. There was no change for activation maps.The study was conducted in an experimental setting, and it cannot fully represent the recording environment of a clinical setting. Despite this, we expect our results are directly transferable to the clinic. An epicardial electrode sock (108 electrodes with inter-electrode spacing 9.9 ± 2.2 mm) was attached to the ventricles and bipolar pacing leads to the RV apex. The hearts were transferred to a human-shaped torso tank with 128 electrodes (inter-electrode spacing 66 ± 24 mm) embedded in the surface (Fig. The isolated, perfused heart was suspended in a human torso shaped tank with 192 electrodes (with inter-electrode spacing 40.2 ± 16.8mm) and filled with an electrolytic solution (500 Ω-cm). The epicardial, intramural, and torso tank electrodes were referenced to a Wilson’s Central Terminal and were sampled at 1000 Hz simultaneously for five seconds during RV pacing. Recent clinical validation studies have also shown large variability in activation map reconstruction accuracy (correlation from −0.68 to 0.82 in one study [9], 0.29 to 0.80 in another [10]). After the forward matrix is obtained for these refined meshes, the rows corresponding to torso measurement electrodes were sampled to form a reduced forward matrix, which we denote as A in (1), relating the electrograms (in the refined epicardial meshes) to torso measurements. 