We noticed that radiation at a dose of 10Gy significantly enhanced spheroid migration by approximately 65% compared to the non-irradiated controls (Figs. Radiation treatment enhanced capillary-like network formation by 30%, whereas pre-treatment of tumor cells with puPA and pu2 significantly blocked the angiogenic process as compared to the tumor conditioned medium from irradiated and non-irradiated mock and pSV-transfected IOMM-Lee cells (Figs. Radiation is widely used for the treatment of meningiomas even after gross total resection and especially after subtotal excision (2,3). Our results show that siRNA against uPA and uPAR inhibited invasion and tumor-induced angiogenesis of irradiated IOMM-Lee cells, and also suppressed tumor growth in vivo. Radiation treatment enhanced invasion, migration and angiogenesis, whereas treatment with siRNA against uPA and uPAR decreased the radiation-induced aggressive properties of IOMM-Lee cells and inhibited tumor growth in vivo. Specific inhibitors of EGFR (AG1478), MEK1/2 (U0126), p38 (SB203580), c-Jun NH2-terminal kinase (JNK) (SP600125), phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K) (LY294002), and AKT (AKT inhibitor IV) (Calbiochem, San Diego, CA) were diluted and used as per the manufacturer's instructions. After the indicated hours of incubation in conditioned medium, 20μL of MTT reagent were added to the cells, followed by another 4h of incubation at 37°C. Both benign and malignant meningiomas are treated with surgical excision, with the goal of gross total resection. The PCR conditions were as follows: 95°C for 5 min, followed by 35 cycles of 95°C for 1 min, 55°C for 1 min, and 72°C for 1 min. Equal amounts of protein samples (0.5μg) were resolved on 10% SDS-polyacrylamide gel containing plasminogen and fibrinogen, and stained as described previously (17). Cells were collected and lysed in RIPA buffer [50 mmol/mL Tris-HCl (pH 8.0), 150mmol/mL NaCl, 1% IGPAL, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS] containing 1mM sodium orthovanadate, 0.5mM PMSF, 10μg/mL aprotinin, 10μg/mL leupeptin and resolved on SDS-PAGE. After overnight transfer onto a PVDF membrane, the blot was blocked with 6% nonfat dry milk in PBS and 0.1% Tween-20. Comparable loading of proteins on the gel was verified by re-probing the blots with an antibody specific for the housekeeping gene product, GAPDH. Cells were allowed to migrate through the matrigel for 24h. Single-fraction radio-surgery could also be the primary treatment for dural-based tumors without rapid growth. Control animals were injected with PBS only (Mock). Control animals were injected with PBS only (Mock). Subcutaneous tumor growth was measured every 3 days with vernier calipers. Mice were euthanized when the tumor diameter in control mice measured between 11 and 12 mm. Statistical analysisAll data are presented as means ± standard errors (SE) of at least three independent experiments, each performed at least in triplicate. Statistical analysisAll data are presented as means ± standard errors (SE) of at least three independent experiments, each performed at least in triplicate. 