The anti-apoptotic function of Bcl-2 is closely associated with its expression level, which is controlled by various mechanisms depending on the apoptotic stimuli [25, 26]. The coincidental decline of Bcl-2 level with an increase of Bax level was detected in hair matrix keratinocytes undergoing apoptosis. Hoechst 33342 and dihydrodichlorofluorescein diacetate (H2DCF-DA) were obtained from Molecular Probes, Inc. (Eugene, OR). The mean fluorescence intensity was quantified by CellQuest software (Becton–Dickinson) analysis of the recorded histograms.Generation of highly reactive oxygen species (hROS) was determined according to the method previously described [30] using HPF as a probe. Approximately 1,000 nuclei from ten random fields were analyzed for each sample. Cell lysates were collected and determined for protein content using the Bradford method (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA). The transferred membranes were blocked for 1 h in 5% nonfat dry milk in TBST (25 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.4, 125 mM NaCl, 0.05% Tween 20) and incubated with appropriate primary antibodies at 4°C overnight. Membranes were washed twice with TBST for 10 min and incubated with horseradish peroxidase-coupled isotype-specific secondary antibodies for 1 h at room temperature. The immune complexes were detected by enhanced chemiluminescence detection system (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ) and quantified using analyst/PC densitometry software (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA). The fluorescence signals were measured using a fluorescence microplate reader at the excitation and emission wavelengths of 488 and 520 nm, respectively. The lysates were collected and determined for protein content using the Bradford method (Bio-Rad Laboratories). Cell lysates (60 µg protein) were incubated with anti-Bcl-2 antibody at 4°C for 14 h, followed by incubation with protein G-conjugated agarose for 4 h at 4°C. The immune complexes were washed 6 times with cold lysis buffer and resuspended in 2× Laemmli sample buffer. The immune complexes were washed 6 times with cold lysis buffer and resuspended in 2× Laemmli sample buffer. The immune complexes were separated by 10% SDS-PAGE and analyzed by western blotting as described. Cisplatin (cis-diamminedichloroplatinum) is a commonly used chemotherapeutic agent for a variety of human cancers with a high potential to induce alopecia [4, 7]. These results suggest that hydroxyl radical is a major ROS produced by the cells in response to cisplatin treatment and that this oxidative species plays a key role in apoptosis induced by cisplatin. 