Scout images taken from CT documenting the implant trajectory and angular deviation matched the projections of the three-dimensional segmented object rotated to simulate anterior–posterior and lateral views by visual inspection (Fig. Vector Plot of Electrode DisplacementA corresponding vector plot for Method 2 calculations is also shown (Fig. Although our study was retrospective and inadequately powered to significantly correlate these metrics, our results support two previous publications.3,17 In comparing calculated upward displacement (Method 1) to measured rostral displacement (Method 2), no statistical significance was found between the calculated and measured value for upward tip displacement, with a value of p < 0.2. Instead of needing to repeat the time-consuming process of both obtaining and viewing CT and MRI scans, as well as fusing them, neurologists may consider deformation calculations to guide adaptation of intraoperative test stimulation data in order to compensate post-operatively. This was statistically significant, with p < 0.05. This was statistically significant (p < 0.01). This was statistically significant (p < 0.01). This was statistically significant (p < 0.01). Method 1 (calculated method) utilizes a three-dimensional reconstruction obtained from a single delayed CT scan. Understanding the relationship of head position and implications of the proposed implementation of lengthy procedures utilizing rigid infusion devices in the setting of convection-enhanced delivery is crucial. After the administration of propofol/dexmetatomadine sedation and administration of lid-ocane/bupivicane local anesthetic, the Cosman-Roberts-Wells (CRW) stereotactic frame (Integra Neuroscience, Plainsboro, NJ) and associated Luminant® stereotactic MRI/CT localizer is applied. Pneumocephalus volume and distance were also computationally determined using iPlan Stereotaxy 2.6 (BrainLab). Distance A is the distance from the point of greatest deviation to the implant depth. Distance C is the distance from the entry point into the skull to the point of greatest deviation.Using simple geometry, the approximate degree of tip retraction could be modeled and estimated. Next, the distance between the point of greatest deviation and point 1 was measured on the straight dashed trajectory. 