However, we found 676 genes with significant differential correlation with Smoothened in these tissues (P < 0.05, Bonferroni correction, see Methods). This relationship is supported by the observation that across the whole genome, Pten was the third-most-frequently “rewired” genes in papillomas carrying Hras mutations. We also present CARMEN, a user-friendly software package for network analysis. Methods such as correlation analysis that identify relationships between genes in the same compartment or across compartments in intact tissues are a useful tool to understand the interactions that underlie normal tissue homeostasis, responses to damage, and development of progressive diseases including neoplasia. Mice were housed in standard conditions, fed ad libitum, and sacrificed at 8 weeks of age. Mice were housed in standard conditions, fed ad libitum, and sacrificed at 8 weeks of age. Animals were housed and treated in accordance with the regulations and protocols stipulated by the UCSF Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC). Animals were housed and treated in accordance with the regulations and protocols stipulated by the UCSF Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC). Mice were sacrificed at 0, 2, 4, 6, 24, 48, and 72 hours, and after one week. Raw FVBBX microarray data are available for download at GEO (accession GSE52650). Statistical methodsSpearman rank correlation 5% genome-wide significance was established by permutation (Churchill and Doerge, 1994). Using matched tissues reduced non-genetic variation and provided equivalent statistical power in both conditions. We then calculated pair-wise differential correlation genome-wide and ranked each gene by the number of significant differential correlations between the two tissue conditions. Expression of the proliferation-associated keratins Krt6a, Krt6b, Krt16, and Krt17 increased significantly after TPA treatment, and these genes were linked to the “Skin Barrier and Cornified Envelope” module. Early differentiation markers (involucrin) increased to a peak at two hours, followed by markers of the primitive epithelium (Krt8), which increase to peak at six hours and revert to homeostatic levels by 12 hours. Markers of the cornified envelope (Sprr1b) and keratin wound response (Krt6a) increase to a peak at 12 hours and are still significantly elevated 48 hours after treatment. 