After 24 h, the films were removed and the resulting extracts were kept in the refrigerator (4°C) prior to using them in the cell culture experiment.Determination of degree of cytotoxicity:The suspension of cultured cells (5000 cell/mL) was inoculated (100 μL/well) in a 96-well plate. The 96-well plate was then pre-incubated in a humidified incubator at 37°C, 5% CO2 for 24 h. After 24 h, 10 μL of the different leachates were added (n=5) and incubated for another 24 h to allow the potential toxicants to act on cells. The 96-well plate was then pre-incubated in a humidified incubator at 37°C, 5% CO2 for 24 h. After 24 h, 10 μL of the different leachates were added (n=5) and incubated for another 24 h to allow the potential toxicants to act on cells. To each of the wells, 10 μL of the CCK-8 solution was added and incubated for 3 h. To avoid the background interference, 100 μL of the DMEM medium was added in 4 of the wells. Results were reported as percentage cell viability (percentage of control) after subtracting the average absorbance of the medium (without cells) as follows.%CellViability=Absorbance of the test samples Absorbance of the control samples×1002.2.9Statistical analysisAll data is reported as a mean ± standard deviation. No significant Cu-NPs traces were found on film’s surface with 3 wt% copper observed as illustrated by the images captured from Surface Electron Microscopy (SEM) at an accelerating voltage of 5 kV. The Cu-SNAP films showed a slightly higher amount of leached copper than films only containing Cu-NPs but still much below the recommended limit. The antibiotic Penicillin-Streptomycin (Pen-Strep) and fetal bovine serum (FBS) were purchased from Gibco-Life Technologies (Grand Island NY 14072). To ensure that there were no traces of residual THF, the films were further vacuum dried using a desiccator at room temperature. The control Carbosil films were prepared in a similar manner but excluded the addition of SNAP. The PRP and PPP were combined in a ratio to give a final platelet concentration ca. The wells were dried for 6 hours between coats, followed by 24 hours drying under vacuum to ensure all THF had been removed from the wells.Exposure to the PRP solution was done using 300 μL of the calcified PRP and incubated at 37°C for 2 hours with mild rocking (25 rpm) on a Medicus Health blood tube rocker. Briefly, 100 μL of the lysing buffer for each sample was combined with 100 μL of the detection agent and incubated for 25 min protected from light. Each of the test films (SNAP, 1 wt% Cu-NPs, 3 wt% Cu-NPs, 1 wt% Cu-SNAP, 3 wt% Cu-SNAP) and the control films (Carbosil) were exposed to 2 mL of S. aureus suspension and P. aeruginosa individually in 15 mL sterile tubes (n=3). 