Five days old flies were transferred to empty vials and temperature was raised to 38°C by submerging vials in a controlled-temperature water bath. We defined paralysis as a condition when a fly was paralyzed and unable to walk or keep standing position for at least 1 minute. These two assays were compared in a number of experiments, which indicated that the assays produce consistent results and have similar sensitivity. The kinetics for Neu5Gc showed no saturation, so we could only estimate that the Km for Neu5Gc was > 3.5 mM (Fig. The DmCSAS-DA protein was unable to rescue the phenotype (Fig. Our results suggested that insect and vertebrate CMP-Sia synthetases are regulated by different molecular and cellular mechanisms, which shed light on evolutionary adaptation of these proteins to distinct subcellular environments. Materials and reagentsSugars, nucleotides, mouse anti-FLAG antibody and FLAG affinity beads (anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel) were purchased from Sigma. Expression constructs, site-directed mutagenesis and cloningThe UAS-CSAS-FLAG expression construct for in vivo expression was described previously [8]. For generating the CSAS-DA mutant, we used a PCR-based site-specific mutagenesis protocol [10] and changed the codon 228, GAC to GCC, which resulted in D228A mutation in the CSAS protein. For generating the CSAS-DA mutant, we used a PCR-based site-specific mutagenesis protocol [10] and changed the codon 228, GAC to GCC, which resulted in D228A mutation in the CSAS protein. For transient and stable transfections, we used Ca2+-phosphate protocol as previously described [11] or Effectene reagent (Qiagen) according to manufacturer’s protocol. The cells were lysed by sonication, using Branson Sonifier® 150. Lysis was completed by rocking vials on nutator for 20 min. To isolate FLAG-tagged proteins, 20 μl of anti-FLAG affinity beads (Sigma), prewashed in Lysis buffer, were added per 1 ml of lysate. The reaction was mixed, centrifuged immediately for 30 sec at 3,000 rpm, and then 100 μl of supernatant was withdrawn and kept at −20°C as a sample corresponding to zero-time point. Reaction was stopped by transferring reaction tubes on ice for 5 min, followed by centrifugation through 10K Amicon Ultra spin filter (Merck Millipore) to remove beads and protein content. The concentration of the product of enzymatic conversion of MESG substrate was detected with Ultrospec 2000 spectrophotometer (Pharmacia Biotech) at 360 nm. Temperature-sensitive (TS) paralysis phenotype was assayed essentially as described previously [16]. For TS-paralysis assays, individual flies were collected on the day of eclosure and aged individually for 5 days. 