2 (Global Solar UV Index using a scale of 1 (or “Low”) to 11 and higher (or “Extreme”)). Over one third of our cohort reported vitamin supplementation at time of biopsy, but the proportion reporting vitamin D supplementation was similar across all three groups. Animal and in vitro data suggest an anti-inflammatory and an antifibrotic potential of vitamin D [10, 11]. Animal and in vitro data suggest an anti-inflammatory and an antifibrotic potential of vitamin D [10, 11]. Animal and in vitro data suggest an anti-inflammatory and an antifibrotic potential of vitamin D [10, 11]. The serum 25 (OH)-D concentration associated with optimum antifibrotic potential is not known. Further, to have the power to show a possible effect of vitamin D supplementation on fibrosis, an adequate number of patients with severe fibrosis would need to be included. The major strengths of our study include the large sample size of children and adolescents with biopsy-confirmed NAFLD, documentation of vitamin D prescription, and season of measurement of serum 25(OH)-D. The study was limited by the retrospective and crosssectional design, which precluded assessing patients’ adherence to the prescribed dose of vitamin D, or impact of duration and amount of vitamin D supplementation on liver histology. The literature linking serum 25(OH)-D concentrations with liver disease severity in children with NAFLD is also inconclusive. Inclusion criteria were histologically confirmed NAFLD in children and adolescents evaluated at the Steatohepatitis Center at Cincinnati Children’ s Hospital Medical Center from April 1, 2009 to July 30, 2018 and body mass index (BMI) at or above the 85th percentile for age and sex. Thus, three separate controls were used to validate the assay. To categorize obesity severity, patients were defined as overweight (BMI: 85th to <95th percentile for age and sex based on CDC growth charts), obese class I (BMI: 95th percentile to <120% of the 95th percentile), obese class II (BMI: 120 to <140% of the 95th percentile), or obese class III (BMI ≥ 140% of the 95th percentile) [22]. BMI group variable was always put in the model regardless of being selected or not. Association between 25(OH)-D concentrations and histologic severity of NAFLDThere was no statistically significant difference in the severity of steatosis, ballooning, lobular or portal inflammation and NAS among the groups (Tables 2 and 4). After controlling for age, vitamin D supplementation and season (the confounders automatically selected from a list of possible confounders (which originally also included ethnicity, BMI ɀ-score and T2DM) by the statistical model based on their significance), the vitamin D insufficiency group had two times the odds of having higher stage fibrosis compared to the vitamin D sufficiency group (adjusted OR, 2.04; 95%CI, 1.02–4.08) (Table 4). This is the largest pediatric study investigating the relationship between serum 25(OH)-D concentrations and histologic liver disease severity in children with NAFLD to date. Vitamin D deficiency is highly prevalent among adults with NAFLD [7, 8]. Vitamin D deficiency is highly prevalent among adults with NAFLD [7, 8]. In our study, 14.5% of deficient and 29.1% of insufficient patients had stage 2 fibrosis or worse (Table 2). The results of our study are consistent with those reported by Hourigan et al  who also did not observe an association between vitamin D levels and NAFLD severity, including fibrosis, in a multicenter North American cohort of 102 well-characterized children with biopsy-confirmed NAFLD. 