1C), and the growth factor did not induce S phase entry (supplemental Fig. 3Aa) or serum (not shown) rapidly (within 5 min) induced tyrosine phosphorylation of several proteins sized > 160, ~95, ~70 and ~ 40 kd. EGF but not serum also induced tyrosine phosphorylation of ~55 kd-sized proteins, while phosphorylation by serum was more sustained (> 2 hrs, not shown), as compared to the transient EGF effects (5 – 15 min). Although anorexic effects of gefitinib cannot be excluded, at MTD (150 mg/kg) in NCR-NU mice, weight loss does not exceed 10% (22, 23) and weight loss was not observed compared to vehicle-treated animals not harboring tumors. In addition to activation of ErbB3, induction with the ErbB3 ligand heregulin also activated p185c-neu, indicating p185c-neu as the preferred dimerization partner in GH3 cells. Similar to the in vitro results, ex vivo analysis showed down-regulation of PRL but not GH mRNA expression. These infrequent neoplasms usually exhibit a slowly progressive malignant phenotype with metastasis, while resisting most forms of conventional therapy including dopamine agonists, surgery and radiation (7, 8). Templates for probes and Northern Blot AnalysisProbes for murine POMC, Pttg1, rat GH and PRL were generated as described (16–18). RNA extraction was performed using TRIZOL® reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Membrane pre-hybridization and hybridization were performed using QuickHyb Solution® (Stratagene) and then exposed to HyperfilmTM MP (Amersham) for 1 to 4 days at −70°C. Cells cultured in 100 mm dishes were lysed in 1 ml Lysis buffer 1 containing protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail tablets (Roche Molecular Biochemicals). Membranes were blocked for 1 hr in 2% nonfat dry milk (or 5% BSA) in TBS-T buffer, and incubated overnight with primary antibody. In vivo experimentsFemale athymic NCR-NU mice (8–10 weeks of age) were purchased from Taconic Farms, Inc. (Hudson, NY, USA) and maintained in a laminar air-flow unit under aseptic conditions. Maximum tolerated dose (MTD; 150 mg/kg) of gefitinib in NCR-NU mice has been determined previously (with similar administration schedules) (22, 23). ImmunofluorecenceSlides containing tissue sections were baked for 20 min at 60°C, washed in xylene, ethanol gradient (100%, 95%, 85%, 75%) and then ddH2O. Hormone assaysRIA for rat GH and PRL were performed in duplicate, using reagents provided by the National Hormone and Peptide Program, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, California, USA). Iodination of GH and PRL (5 μg) with iodine-125 (500 μCi) (PerkinElmer Life & Analytical Sciences, Boston, MA, USA) mixed with 0.1 mg Iodo-Gen (Pierce, Rockford, IL) was performed using 10-ml columns prepared by G-75 Sephadex (Sigma Chemical Co.). 