4, GluRIIA and GluRIIB protein from larvae were detectable on immunoblots. Our immunoblot technique was sensitive enough to detect a one-half reduction in GluRIIA or GluRIIB protein, since loading reduced amounts of protein showed easily measurable concomitant reductions in GluRIIA and GluRIIB (Fig. Except where noted, all data were obtained from wild-type strain ‘Oregon R’ or (where appropriate) the physiologically equivalent control strain w[1118]. In GluRIIA[E783A]; df(2L)cl[h4]/GluRIIA[AD9] mutant animals, all GluRIIA proteins are engineered such that there is an alanine in place of glutamic acid at position 783. To record excitatory junction currents (EJCs), segmental nerves to the voltage-clamped muscle were stimulated at 0.5 Hz by a Grass S48 stimulator via a suction electrode filled with bath saline (0 mM glutamate). Time constants were calculated from exponential fits to the falling phase of individual currents, using PClamp 10. Time constants were calculated from exponential fits to the falling phase of individual currents, using PClamp 10. We then moved the same outline for measurement to a nearby region on the same muscle and measured fluorescence in the same way for the same channel. Note that the antibody used for visualization of GluRIIB in situ (Fig. Mouse monoclonal anti-GluRIIA (8B4D2) antibodies were obtained from University of Iowa Developmental Studies Hybridoma bank and used at 1/100. FITC, TRITC, and Cy5-cojugated goat anti-mouse or anti-rabbit secondary antibodies were obtained from Jackson Immunoresearch Laboratories (West Grove, PA, USA) and used at 1/400. In 0.5 mM glutamate, EJC amplitudes were reduced to less than 50 nA and kinetics were slowed such that EJCs lasted 100–200 ms (Fig. Above 1 mM glutamate, EJC amplitudes and kinetics were further altered in a dose-dependent fashion (Fig. As all cells tend to sequester and metabolize glutamate, some measurement variation could be due to differences in hemolymph extraction, or contamination by hemocytes (Ribeiro and Brehelin 2006). 