This provided evidence that the spindle-assembly checkpoint was not activated by E. faecalis. A similar set of responses was found with increased aneuploidy and tetraploidy, γH2AX formation, decreased γH2AX foci following treatment with MnSOD and catalase, and G2 arrest (Supplementary Fig. The production of clastogens by E. faecalis-infected macrophages is analogous to the induction of CIN through the radiation-induced bystander effect (13). Intestinal commensals are potential important contributors to the development of sporadic human colorectal cancer (CRC), but the identification of relevant microorganisms has been impeded by the complex ecology of the large intestine (1,2). The bystander effect has been shown to occur in vivo in congenic sex-mismatch bone marrow transplantation experiments (14). These showed that the bystander effect can activate ATM and ATR, generate γH2AX foci and, for HCT116 cells, induce a G2/M arrest. There was no histological evidence for inflammation or mucosal abnormality in control or E. faecalis-exposed mice. These findings occurred through a bystander effect and provide a mechanism by which redox-active intestinal commensals may contribute to cellular transformation and tumorigenesis. COX-2 contributes to both the radiation- and macrophage-induced bystander effect (9,15,16), although mechanisms are unclear. The results reported here show that the macrophage-induced bystander effect can rapidly induce aneuploidy and tetraploidy in colonic epithelial cells. Several potential mediators for the bystander effect include tumor necrosis factor-alpha and breakdown products of polyunsaturated fatty acids such as 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (47,48), although no single agent has been definitively shown to be causative. using fluorescent microscopy according to previously described criteria (23). Care was taken to preserve blood flow with no ischemia observed in the colons of 24 mice previously studied using this protocol (27). Experimental and control groups in ploidy assays were compared by chi-square and the number of positive nuclei in colon biopsies by the student's t test. 