The recordings were transferred digitally to a PC for the perceptual tests.ListenersEight listeners were recruited, four male and four female, aged between 18 and 25 (mean age 20.3 years). The listeners could hear the texts as often as they desired and they were self-paced to avoid fatigue. This variable phonetic quality of the /æ/ words is, however, not captured in our features which represent the categorical presence or lack of a difference between word pairs like LASS and GLASS. A Sennheiser K6 microphone was used to record vocal responses directly onto a DAT recorder for use in the analysis, as in normal-listening conditions. The output of an additional Sennheiser K6 microphone was relayed via a Quad microphone amplifier to the Digitech model studio 400 - signal processor to produce the required signal alteration. The output of an additional Sennheiser K6 microphone was relayed via a Quad microphone amplifier to the Digitech model studio 400 - signal processor to produce the required signal alteration. Telephones make such alterations to the voice (as well as change in its intensity). However, the apparently more robust evidence from foreign-language acquisition may also not be understood as a hard and fast rule. The texts exploit the potential differences between dialects discussed above, namely either differences in phonemic oppositions, in the lexical incidence of phonemes or in the phonetic realisation of phonemes. We are using it in this sense in as much as we refer to regional pronunciations as accented in contrast to a Home Counties (HC) pronunciation. In all cases, number of years in London was contiguous and in the period immediately prior to when the recordings were made. First, there are prosodic and segmental differences, the former referring to lexical or phrasal stressing or accentuation patterns and intonation, the latter referring to the realization of consonants and vowels1. Second, there are phonological versus phonetic differences, the former involving differences in the sound systems such as missing or additional sound oppositions (such as the absence of a difference between “fair” and “fur” in Liverpool English), the latter involving the way the properties are realized within the same framework of oppositions (e.g., northern [α=⌉] vs. a more upper class [A±⌉] for /A⌉/). 