At the end of the study, the research coordinators were responsible for analyzing and publishing the significant result and findings. In our study, some parallel tasks (in phase ii and iii) were done based on the demand for this project’s progress in the project timeline (shown in Table 1). This study took place at 4 major institutes of Bangladesh in two geographical locations—Dhaka and Chittagong. In Bangladesh, social-cultural-financial constraints and a scarcity of mental health care practitioners have deprived families raising children with Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) from regular monitoring, care, and support [12–15]. Phase 3: ResultThe overall outcome of this work is to create a historical dataset for children with ASD, which helps care practitioners develop treatment plans using evidence-based decision making. Figure 5a,b shows a screenshot of a progress report for a patient.Update the SMS pattern: For SMS users of mCARE, initially there was a format, comma (,) separate input, for taking the parents’ feedback to the system. Figure 9 shows that parents with higher levels of education, where fathers did service and mothers were housewives, their children showed more improvement than others. From the Tables 4 and 5, since we have 150 participants, we can improve the result statistically significant by increasing participant number in future. We found a number of impacts directly related to COVID-19 on the participants and caregivers through the mCARE system. This interactive automated and 3D scenario-based application used Childhood Autism Spectrum Test (CAST), and Cross-Cultural Translation & Validation model, and employed 39 questions and some 3D characters and scenarios for detecting autism in children aged 3–11 years in Bangladesh. In [49], Kim et al  summarize and categorize all smartphone applications for Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) from the Autism Speaks official website [50]. This study was done at 11 Autism and Developmental Disabilities Monitoring (ADDM) sites in the United States. 