These findings may provide vital principles for building a clinical hyperspectral camera with appropriate multi-excitations in the blue range for best detection of sub-RPE deposits consistent with patient safety. Such a clinical camera could detect AMD at its earliest stages for research on its mechanism and to monitor emerging therapies. This suggests that the AF spectra of drusen and sub-RPE deposits may be detectable clinically with suitable hyperspectral AF imaging, despite the fact that anatomically thin BLinD is not detectable by IR reflectance on SD-OCT and BLamD is visible only when thick. This in turn would offer a new method to help diagnose AMD at an early stage. Drusen are also classified into hard and soft on their imaging appearance. In this study we additionally introduce λex 450 and 505 nm to optimize the excitation wavelengths for a proposed clinical hyperspectral AF camera. RPE/BrM flat mounts were prepared from retina tissues from 4 white donors with AMD, as previously described (30). Drusen dimensions were measured on the 40×, 1,390×1,038 dimension images in Photoshop (50 microns = 200 pixel). These spectra were nearly identical, with peaks within 10 nm of 520 nm, in each of the 20 tissue locations, and replicated the spectral signature SDr at 436 nm excitation in our previous report (11). We previously reported from BrM in normal RPE/BrM flat mounts (11) was not observed in any tissue, but was replaced by SDr as the shortest wavelength spectrum recovered. Two foveal samples were inadequate for hyperspectral AF analysis, and one partially recovered only S1 and S2; all of which had large areas of bare BrM. Interestingly, S3 was recovered from all 3 locations in 88F, the same donor that showed S3 at all 5 drusen positions. BLinD and drusen, along with basal laminar deposit (BLamD), constitute a diffusion barrier for the supply of the outer retina with oxygen and nutrients from the choroid, the offloading of unneeded metabolites, and a stimulus to neovascularization. We have previously observed the longer wavelength spectrum S3 to be more correlated than S1 and S2 with pigmented structures in the RPE, and therefore have (11,12) posited it to be the AF signal from the organelle melanolipofuscin (MLF). Usually, there is a slightly higher SDr peak with λex 436 nm excitation compared with 450 nm excitation in our experimental setup with approximately similar radiant energy applied at both excitations. It is also worth noting that the spectrum SDr was not observed in any of the 42 tissue locations from 14 normal eyes studied in our previous work (11), suggesting high specificity of SDr for AMD eyes. Higher resolution spectral image acquisition in the future might resolve individual spectra, if such exist. Also, our study was not powered to investigate regional differences in RPE AF signal that might be ascribable to recently uncovered detailed mapping of autofluorescent granules (31). 