Because distal dendrites are more dynamic than primary dendrites over the 2 hr imaging period (Cline, 2001; Hua and Smith, 2004), we focused our analysis on branch dynamics of secondary and higher order dendrites. Using micropipettes with ∼ 1 µm tip diameter filled with plasmid (3 – 6 µg/µl DNA in ddH2O), we applied stimuli of 1 – 2 µA with 1 s trains of 1 ms square pulses at 200 Hz frequency. Blots were blocked in 5% non-fat milk with 0.1% TBS and TritonX-100, (Sigma) and incubated with primary antibodies diluted in blocking solution. Blots were rinsed and either incubated with biotinylated anti-rabbit Ig (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ) with HRP-conjugated streptavidin (Amersham Biosciences) or directly with HRP-linked mouse IgG. Antibodies used were: rabbit polyclonal GABAAR γ2, rabbit polyclonal VGAT (Synaptic Systems, Germany), goat polyclonal GABAAR α2 (sc-7350, Santa Cruz, CA) and mouse monoclonal anti-GFP (Rockland, Gilbertsville, PA). Sections were rinsed and incubated in secondary antibodies (in 0.1% TritonX -100): Alexa Fluor 568/633 goat anti rabbit, Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-mouse/rabbit (Invitrogen, Eugene, OR). Brain sections selected for confocal imaging correspond to an approximate 100 µm depth from brain surface.To quantify the distribution of immunoreactivity, fluorescent intensity profiles were measured along dendrites and across somata with ImageJ (W. Rasband, NIH, Bethesda, MD). Custom software written in Matlab (Mathworks, Natick, MA) was used for colocalization and shift analyses. Average segment lengths (ASL) were determined by measuring distances between branch tips and branch points, the starting point is the first branch point of the primary dendrite. Recordings were accepted for analysis from cells in which the series resistance did not change over 10% and input resistance (0.7 – 2 GΩ) remained relatively constant. Five minute periods of mIPSC or mEPSC recordings were analyzed with the Synaptosoft Mini Analysis Program. Data are presented as individual data points or as mean ± s.e.m., unless otherwise noted. 1C, right panel) indicating the γ2 subunit is expressed in the midbrain of tadpole. These data indicate that the GABAAR γ2 subunit is present in the optic tectum of X. laevis. 