However, the subsequent removal of stressors induces the dissociation of this protein structure into low MW proteins and triggers a chaperone-to-peroxidase functional switch. Hydroxyl radicals generated from the decomposition of H2O2 through the iron dependent Fenton reaction initiate lipid peroxidation by reacting with methylene groups of polyunsaturated fatty acids [3]. All experimental procedures and protocols used in this study were reviewed and approved by the University of Cincinnati Institutional animal care and use committee and are in accordance with the National Institutes of Health “Guide for the care and use of laboratory animals” (NIH publication No. Hearts were then snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and homogenized in 1× Cell Lysis Buffer (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA) supplemented with 1 mM PMSF and complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN) for quantitative immunoblotting. Hearts were quickly removed and the aorta was cannulated by Langendorff mode and perfused with modified Krebs-Henseleit buffer (KHB: 118 mM NaCl, 4.8 mM KCl, 25 mM HEPES, 1.25 mM K2HPO4, 1.25 mM MgSO4, 11 mM Glucose, 5 mM Taurine and 10 mM Butane-dione Monoxime; pH 7.4) for 5–10 min [13]. The cells were allowed to settle down automatically and Ca concentration was gradually raised to 1.0 mM. Nearly 100% of myocytes appeared infected at 200 MOI by 24 h. The cell phenotype and morphology remained similar among non-infected and adenoviral-infected groups after 24 h of infection. Cardiomyocyte plasma membrane integrity was assessed by measuring lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release into the culture medium with an in vitro LDH assay kit (Sigma–Aldrich). Quantitative immunoblottingCultured myocytes were harvested and lysed for 20 min at 4°C in lysis buffer (20 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 10% glycerol, 0.4 mM sodium orthovanadate, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 10 mM sodium fluoride, 0.5 mM DTT, and 2 μl/ml protease inhibitor cocktail). Under physiological conditions, the toxic effects of ROS can be prevented by such scavenging enzymes as superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione peroxidase (GHPx) and catalase, as well as other non-enzymatic antioxidants. Accordingly, cell nuclear fragmentation was significantly increased by ∼2.8-fold in both control and Ad.GFP infected cells. 