Residues with a ΔCS value between 0.1 ppm and 0.5 ppm were considered moderately perturbed. The φ/ψ angles at positions P ro44–Pro45, Pro96–Pro97 and Pro131–Pro132 of the 20 top-energy models of mTSPONMR-opt and mTSPORosettaCM were used for the analysis. A total of 2000 docking models of VUIIS8310 in complex with mTSPORosettaCM and mTSPONMR-opt were constructed using maximal translational and rotational sampling magnitudes of 5Å and 360°, respectively. For example, there are no backbone amide peaks that exhibit 1H chemical shifts higher than 8.8 ppm. For all samples of mTSPO-DPC at 42 °C, the high-affinity apparent binding constant for Tr1 (KappTr1) was around ~ 10−6 mol fraction units and was independent of the DPC concentration (Figure S3A). weaker affinity) relative to all DPC conditions (Table S1, Figure S3), whereas the change in the high-affinity binding transition phase KappTr1 was negligible. At the same time, these bacterial homologs, although determined in a more native-like lipidic cubic phase environment, have low homology to mTSPO; the sequence identity is only 25% (bcTSPOX-ray) and 30% (rsTSPOX-ray). The mTSPORosettaCM model obtained from multiple template modeling was considered the final mTSPORosettaCM model and used for further analysis. TSPO is a target for imaging ligandsDespite the controversies surrounding TSPO function, TSPO has become a target for cancer imaging via positron emission tomography (PET). The mTSPORosettaCM model differed more strongly from the experimental NOE data: 16 residues had an average distance deviation of more than 2Å. The Pro45–Pro45 site is sequence-conserved between mammalian and bacterial TSPOs while the other two sites are not (compare with Fig. Computational docking models of VUIIS8310 with mTSPORosettaCM and mTSPONMR-opt agreed qualitatively with the ΔCS data and are shown in Fig. There are three main sources of possible distortions for a multispan helical membrane protein. The mTSPORosettaCM model was able to produce meaningful binding poses for the PET tracer molecule VUIIS8310, which agrees with our ΔCS data. We found that VUIIS8310 occupies a site that partially overlaps with the position of PK11195 but penetrates deeper into TSPO to maximize the overlap between its conjugated ring system and the indole side-chain of W53. Despite the controversies regarding its biological function, mammalian TSPO is an attractive target for imaging molecules and possibly cancer therapeutics. For bcTSPOX-Ray, helices I and II contribute to the main dimerization interface. For each titration point, TSPO tryptophan residues were excited at 290 nm and the fluorescence emission maximum was measured at 350 nm (spectral scan from 300 nm to 400 nm) on a Horiba Jobin–Yvon Fluoromax-3™ spectrofluorimeter. 