In situ hybridization revealed that Fgf8 was overexpressed in the GOF cloacal endoderm at E10.5 (Fig. Intriguingly, ectopic Fgf8 expression was detected in similar sporadic areas in the inter-limb ectoderm of Msx2-Cre;β–CatloxEx3 embryos (Fig. We did not observe any change in apoptosis in the UE (Supplemental Fig. Consistently, Shh expressing UE were exposed (Fig. 7L, arrows), which may partially compensate for the loss of β-Catenin in adherens junctions. This upregulation was also confirmed by real-time PCR analysis (data not shown). A more than two folds reduction was detected in the mutant (5.29±0.95% in controls vs 2.24±0.53% in mutants, p<0.0001).Consistently, mesenchymal expression of CyclinD1, a cell cycle regulator and a direct WNT target, was also downregulated (Supplemental Fig. These data provide in vivo evidence for the function of dUE in orchestrating and maintaining mesenchymal gene expression. The swellings subsequently merge medially to form the genital tubercle (GT) and continue to grow distally. For studies involving embryos from E14.5 onward, only males were presented (except for Supplemental Fig. We propose that although Plakoglobin can connect E-Cadherin to α-Catenin and maintain the basic structure of adherens junction, such a junction might not provide the same adhesive force as the wild-type congeners. In situ hybridization35S in situ hybridizations were performed on PFA-fixed paraffin-embedded 10 µm sections as described previously (Wawersik and Epstein, 2000). Electronic Microscopy AnalysisFor SEM analysis, samples were fixed in 3% glutaraldehyde, post-fixed with 1% aqueous osmium tetroxide for 4 hours then processed using the Osmium-Thiocarbohydrazide-Osmium (OTO) method, dehydrated in alcohol and critical point dried from liquid CO2. For TEM and semi-thin histology, samples were fixed in paraformaldehyde and glutaraldehyde, and postfixed with aqueous 1% OsO4 for 2 hours. Apoptosis AssayTUNEL staining was performed on paraformaldehyde (PFA)-fixed paraffin-embedded 10µm sections using the In Situ Cell Death Kit (Roche Diagnostic Corp., Indianapolis, IN), according to manufacturer’s instructions. RT-PCR analysis showed that Tcf1, Lef1 and Tcf4 were expressed throughout GT development (Supplemental Table 1) and 35S-in situ hybridization revealed that Tcf1 and Tcf4 were co-expressed in the dUE where TOPGAL activity was detected (Fig. We first analyzed tissue specificity of the Cre lines by crossing them with the Rosa26-LacZ reporter mice (R26R) (Soriano, 1999). 