Targeting to these punctae was mediated in part through 3-phosphoinositide-binding as SNX2(K211A) was entirely cytosolic, and wild-type SNX2 dissociated from these structure on incubation with the PI 3-kinase inhibitor, wortmannin (100 nM for 10 minutes; data not shown). These in vivo data therefore confirm the in vitro conclusion that SNX2 is incapable of inducing significant membrane tubulation. In order to confirm this study we characterised the specificity of a monoclonal antisera raised against SNX2. HeLa cells transiently transfected with control, SNX2-targeted or a specific SNX1 siRNA duplex (the latter having previously been characterised) (Carlton et al , 2004) were incubated for 72 hours prior to probing whole cell lysates with the SNX2 antisera. A number of independent studies have now provided substantial evidence for an evolutionarily conserved function for the yeast and mammalian retromer complexes in regulating retrieval of TGN resident cargo from endosomes (Horazdovsky et al , 1997; Seaman et al , 1997; Seaman et al , 1998; Arighi et al , 2004; Seaman, 2004; Carlton et al , 2004). Therefore, there is a real need to analyse the remaining SNX/BAR proteins in order to determine whether SNX1 is unique in sensing membrane curvature and inducing membrane tubulation. A goat anti-SNX1 polyclonal antibody was from Santa Cruz Biotechnology. Rabbit polyclonal anti-CI-MPR was a kind gift from Prof. Paul Luzio (CIMR, Cambridge). Sheep polyclonal anti-TGN46 was from Serotec and mouse monoclonal anti-CD8 was from Alexis. These values were expressed as a percentage of the total number of fluorescent structures per cell, and the process was repeated for 3–5 individual cells. Cells were chased into DHB containing 50 μg/ml cold transferrin for the indicated times. Cells were solubilised with 1 M NaOH at room temperature for 30 minutes and recycled, degraded and internalised counts were collected as for the 125I-transferrin trafficking assays. Coverslips were transferred to a well containing 3 ml of ice cold DHB for 15 minutes to stop trafficking processes. Alexa488-fluorescence intensity was calculated using the Leica supplied imaging analysis package, LCSLite. Analysis of binding revealed that SNX2 associated primarily with liposomes supplemented with either PtdIns(3)P or PtdIns(3,5)P2 (Fig. 