Table 2 presents the results of two sets of SEM analyses and several supplemental tests. However, breastfed and non-breastfed children did not have significant differences in subscales of externalising (−0.41, P = 0.08) and internalising (−0.18, P = 0.31) behaviour problems. Still, breastfed and non-breastfed children did not have significant differences in subscales of externalising and internalising behaviour problems. One point increase in cognitive stimulation raised the LW test score by 0.77 points (95% CI: 0.30, 1.24; P < 0.001), and one point increase in emotional support reduced the subscale of externalising behaviour problems by 0.21 points (95% CI: −0.35, −0.06; P < 0.001). Previous research has investigated the association of breastfeeding, separately, with cognitive development and behaviour problems and generally found consistent results with our study – breastfeeding was positively associated with academic tests but had no relationships with behaviour problems (Borra et al  2012; Fitzsimons & Vera-Hernández 2012). About 7% of sample participants were excluded from the analysis and may affect the findings’ external validity. About 7% of sample participants were excluded from the analysis and may affect the findings’ external validity. The objective of this study thus was to further investigate the nurturing hypothesis (i.e., the proxy process in Fig. Compared with the second wave, a proportion of children were excluded from the third wave in 2007 due to age ineligibility, resulting in a smaller sample size (N = 1623). The Full-Information Maximum Likelihood method (Muthén et al  1987) was applied to address the missing information on these measures. The Full-Information Maximum Likelihood method (Muthén et al  1987) was applied to address the missing information on these measures. The Full-Information Maximum Likelihood method (Muthén et al  1987) was applied to address the missing information on these measures. The raw scores of reading and math tests were standardised across age to a 0–200 continuous variable, respectively. The index was split into two subscales measuring externalising or aggressive behaviours and internalising or withdrawn behaviours. We adjusted for children’s demographic characteristics, including race (White, Black, and others), gender (female and male) and age. The inclusion of extensive covariates in supplemental tests did not change the relationships between predictor variables and outcome variables. In the first set, we simultaneously regressed five outcome variables, including three academic test scores and two subscales of behaviour problems, on a dichotomous indicator of breastfeeding and children’s demographic characteristics (i.e. In addition, the inclusion of socio-economic characteristics and parenting behaviours in the second set is likely to weaken the associations between breastfeeding practice and child outcomes. 