DigiGait software was used to measure the average stride length and frequency for each limb, as well as the duration of stride, stance and swing phases. Speed-dependent gait change from left-right alternation to synchrony in Chx10∷DTA miceIn the normal adult mouse, left-right coordination is an important characteristic of the gait at all speeds. A rate of 7 steps/s was chosen to divide the wild type trials into slow (<7 steps/s; n= 31 trials) and fast groups (7-9 steps/s; n= 32 trials). We analyzed the regularity of L2 ventral root rhythmic bursting cycle frequency using autocorrelation analysis during fictive locomotion evoked by 6μM NMDA and 6μM 5-HT. We tested this hypothesis by determining whether there is a significant relationship between the left-right phase (measured by the value of the cross-correlation coefficient), and the burst frequency. As illustrated in Figure 6B, the value at zero of the crosscorrelogram is less negative at the higher frequency when the burst frequency is higher. Circular analysis shows that the left-right phase loses its significant alternation at the higher frequency; this reverses upon return to 6:6μM NMDA and 5-HT (Figure 6B and 6C). Breeding was performed as follows: prm-Cre; chx10∷LNL∷DTA male mice, on a mixed C57/BL6 and 129/S6/SvEv (ES cell component) genetic background, were bred to ICR females to produce heterozygous offspring with a single copy of the recombined chx10∷DTA allele (Chx10∷DTA mice) or homozygous littermates with two wild type chx10 alleles (wild type littermates). Gait analysisThe DigiGait instrument (Mouse Specifics, Inc., Boston, MA) was used to analyze gait in 11 Chx10∷DTA and 11 wild type littermates age P24-25. DigiGait software was used to identify stance and swing phases for all four limbs in every video frame, and to measure average values for stride length and stride frequency, as well as duration of stride, stance, and swing for each limb. Ventral root recordings were bandpass filtered (100 Hz to 1 kHz) and recorded using an alternating current amplifier (model 1600; A-M Systems, Carlsborg, WA). Correlation analysisThe ventral root extracellular data were integrated and smoothed with a time constant of 0.2s and analyzed using custom written programs in Spike 2 (Cambridge Electronic Design, Cambridge, UK). We asked whether the genetic background of the dam could improve the survival of progeny that carry a copy of the recombined Chx10∷DTA allele. 