Under stressful conditions, corticoids are released from the adrenal glands into the bloodstream and subsequently enter the brain. Thymus weights increased in ADX animals, and decreased in the high CORT group compared to controls (oneway ANOVA, F2,9 = 41.2, P < 0.001; ADX, Bonferroni P < 0.001; High CORT, Bonferroni P < 0.0001). One-way ANOVA showed a highly significant difference between the groups: Brdu, F5,30 = 22.6, P < 0.001; Ki-67, F5,30 = 10.0, P < 0.001. Pairwise comparisons showed that ADX significantly increased proliferation of progenitors compared to intact animals, as expected (Bonferroni P < 0.001 for both BrdU and Ki-67). On the other hand, the GR antagonist MIFE did not affect proliferation. This shows that the dose of MIFE used in Experiment 2 was sufficient to antagonize the GRs. The respective roles of MR and GR were directly tested in Experiment 4. The results agreed with those of Experiment 2: MR activation down-regulates proliferation of progenitor cells. In addition, this experiment clearly shows that activation of the GRs alone is powerful enough to negatively regulate proliferation (because RU362 has a highly specific action on this receptor type). Although it is known that corticoids regulate proliferation of progenitors in the adult dentate gyrus, the roles of the two receptors in mediating this process are unclear. Our findings show indisputably that, in the antagonist experiments, inactivation of MR or GR can modulate progenitor proliferation positively. Because in all cases the results from the two methods were the same, and they correlated closely with each other, this can be confidently ruled out. This report shows that activity of MR and GR control the first stage in the neurogenetic process, proliferation of progenitors in the dentate gyrus. Thymus glands were also removed and weighed.Experiment 2Thirty-six animals, divided into six groups (n = 6), were used in this experiment. The process of neurogenesis can be divided into three distinct phases, namely proliferation, survival and differentiation. Trunk blood and thymus glands were collected before perfusion.Experiment 4Five groups of rats (n = 6) were used. Animals were killed 24 h post-BrdU (Fig. Thymus glands and trunk blood samples were taken as above. The sections were then quenched in hydrogen peroxide and incubated overnight in monoclonal mouse anti-Ki-67 primary anti-body (Novocastra, UK; 1 : 100) with 0.2% Triton X-100 and 1% normal horse serum. Corticoids represent one of the most potent regulatory factors of progenitor proliferation so far known. Statistical analysisData was analysed by one- or two-way ANOVA; the variances were tested for homogeneity. 