The ability of macrophages to exit the neointima and remove cholesterol via reverse transendothelial migration is critical to retarding the development of atherosclerotic plaques and promoting plaque regression [32]. Monocytes from HIV+ individuals showed impaired cholesterol efflux and reduced expression of cholesterol transportersThe above data indicate that monocytes from HIV+ individuals have an increased potential to form foam cells, independent of the atherogenic effects of serum, suggesting that HIV is associated with intrinsic changes to monocytes that may alter lipid transport. Our study reports novel data indicating that monocytes from HIV+ individuals, a population characterized by chronic inflammation and immune activation, have a greater propensity to differentiate into foam cells and that elevated levels of TNF in plasma of these individuals further enhances this effect. Cells extracted from collagen gels were stained with 0.2μg/mL BODIPY® 493/503 (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA) in 150mM NaCl for 20 min at room temperature and anti-TNF-PE, CD36-FITC, CD14-APC and CD11b-PE (all from BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA) as described [20]. Cells were immediately incubated at 37°C in a humidified temperature-controlled chamber coupled to a DeltaVision deconvolution microscope (Applied Precision-GE Healthcare, Issaquah, WA, USA) and images were captured in z-series on a CCD camera through a 20x 0.45 NA lens. Gene expression analysis of cholesterol efflux and metabolism intermediatesThe expression of proteins involved in cholesterol metabolism and transport was assessed via quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR). Data and statistical analysisNon-parametric, two-tailed Mann-Whitney U test was used for unpaired data and Wilcoxon rank-sum test for paired data. Parametric unpaired t-test was used for data passing the D’Agostino-Pearson omnibus normality test. Of the HIV+ individuals, four were receiving cART and had low (80 copies/ml, n=1) or undetectable (<40 copies/ml, n=3) viral loads and the remaining four were not receiving cART and had a median viral load of 23,400 copies/ml (range: 300 to 254,800 copies/ml).When added to unstimulated HUVEC in media containing 20% pHS, a significantly increased proportion of monocytes from HIV+ individuals differentiated into foam cells as compared to monocytes from control subjects (median foam cells 18.9% vs 0%, respectively, p=0.004, Fig. 1A).Consistent with our previous findings, activation of HUVEC with TNF prior to monocyte migration significantly increased foam cell formation by monocytes from control donors (p=0.016 for both pHS and autologous serum, Fig. As seen with unactivated HUVEC, autologous serum from HIV+ but not control individuals significantly increased foam cell formation when monocytes were added to TNF activated HUVEC (p=0.02 vs 0.30 respectively, Fig. 