The cross-lag mixed effects models employed addresses whether there is a group level generalized relationship between these change scores during a dynamic developmental period for these adolescents. In addition, this observed association holds for tobacco, marijuana, hard drug use, and both overall and binge alcohol use, even when relevant covariates are included in the model. Holmes et al (2016) also found that FO has a positive influence on SU over time in a small sample of typically developing youth with high sense of religion (Holmes and Kim-Spoon, 2016). We used confirmatory factor analysis to assess the soundness of a composite measure of mean scores and the fatalism measure as a representation of FO. The items contributing to the subscale indicate the adolescent’s view of the importance of future achievement in the domains of education, work, and family, and avoidance of legal system involvement. The aspiration score mean for the sample at baseline was 3.15 [94%CI: 2.19, 4.12] with a Cronbach alpha of 0.67.Expectations:The PCFS measure also contains an expectations scale. Youth answered six questions in the same domains referenced above on a five-point Likert scale regarding their perceived likelihood of achieving successful outcomes in each domain (e.g. Youth answered six questions in the same domains referenced above on a five-point Likert scale regarding their perceived likelihood of achieving successful outcomes in each domain (e.g. This value was taken as a relative indicator of the adolescent’s view regarding overall future prospects, and has been found to be salient in this population and in other investigations with this sample (Piquero, 2014). In an influential paper, Nurmi (1989) described future orientation (FO) as a multidimensional process that characterizes a person’s personal goals as well as their thoughts about how and whether those goals are achievable (Nurmi, 1989a; Nurmi, 1991). We used this technique to determine whether there was a quantitatively discernible and bi-directional relationship between the variables. We repeated the above models adjusting for age, gender, data collection site, proportion of time out of a locked facility during the recall period, and highest parental education; known influences of substance use and in line with other studies of SU in JIY (Chassin, et al , 2009).While there are 1,354 subjects in the original data set, we took different sub-samples for each model based on completeness of data. Of those reporting hard drug use, most reported using between one and three different hard drugs (64.3%) sometime in the past, and about 61% reported using hard drugs in the prior 6 months. 