One of the most potent methods to stimulate the innate immune system is via the Toll-like receptors (TLRs). There are 13 distinct TLR family members currently known in mammals, of which the pathogen specificities of 10 (TLR1-9 and 11) have been identified (Crack and Bray, 2007). Although CD11b microglial expression was also found in our non-Tg animals, the staining intensity of CD11b marker was very low (data not shown). To determine whether the CpG ODN amyloid removal effect correlated with the production of antibody, the autoantibody response toward Aβ40 and Aβ42 was assessed periodically. We postulated stimulation of the innate immune system as a possible alternative method for modulating amyloid-related pathology, without associated toxicity. There was a 66% reduction in cortical amyloid burden and a 59% reduction in hippocampal amyloid burden. Our analysis of brain microglia reactivity shows a marked reduction in both the cortex and hippocampus, as assessed by CD11b and CD45 immunoreactivity, reflecting the overall reduction of the amyloid burden in the CpG ODN-treated mice. At later stages of AD, when penetration of CpG ODNs into the CNS may be possible, microglia may be a direct target of the treatment. These findings contrast to ours in which peripheral administration of CpG ODNs is clearly beneficial leading to reductions in both amyloid deposition and cognitive decline. Our results indicate that stimulation of the innate immune system through TLR9 with CpG ODNs is an effective and apparently nontoxic method to reduce the amyloid burden in AD model mice. Clear Plexiglas guillotine doors, operated by a remote pulley system, controlled access to the arms from a central area from which the animals entered and exited the apparatus. Seven sections were analyzed per animal. The adaptive immune response, which takes time to specifically target a foreign protein and provides a memory response upon subsequent re-exposure, is mediated by the more recently evolved T and B cells. 