Like, with the boys, when we are at the youth [centre] perhaps, we are waiting over there, we are going to get jabbed with the needle… They tend to be shy perhaps to come in. For example, one clinician stated: For example, one clinician stated: Where you go and you do a campaign and you say we’ve got this – and again, it’s solution offering – we’ve got this system where for your life choices we can offer you something that’s gonna give you much better protection … Much better protection for when you become sexually active. [T]hey will go to the clinic and then get tested - maybe [they] get a negative [result], then they will get PrEP, then come out. Even your boys won’t care that, like, “Oh, he’s using the medication!” They would know that it’s PrEP. As you mentioned the fact that a friend will come and say I must pour her some pills, maybe other person is afraid to go to the clinic, she is afraid of testing, maybe the results will be positive, and she will go to her friend and her friend will not be knowing the treatment is not being shared, she will come and say “Friend, please pour me PrEP, I hear that there is a PrEP, whatever, please give me half,” and she will give her, it’s because she is scared of going and get tested, so that she can get her PrEP. We found three main themes from our qualitative analysis. Third, we did not systematically collect detailed information about providers’ work histories such as years in service or current employment information. Interviews were conducted in isiXhosa or English based on participant preference. Focus groups and interviews were guided by semi-structured protocols; focus group questions explored normative beliefs and behaviours while in-depth interviews probed more personal aspects of behavioural decision-making and HIV-risk perception. Focus group discussions and individual interviews were digitally audiotaped and lasted about 60 to 90 minutes. Participants received R 150 (~USD 10) for completing focus group and/or individual interviews, respectively. Service providers were eligible for the study if they (a) were at least 18 years old and (b) had at least three years’ experience providing services to adolescents. Coder training entailed the coders independently reviewing a subset of transcripts to ensure a consistent interpretation of the text and application of the coding scheme. We used the Braun and Clarke (2006) thematic analysis framework for coding transcripts and interpreting findings. Participant characteristicsA full quantitative description of the study sample can be found in Giovenco et al  (2018). Adolescents and young people represent a growing key population that stands to benefit from PrEP. Thematic findingsThree themes relevant to the overarching study aims were identified: (HIV-negative female adolescent; individual interview)Boys and girls recalled different types of testing-related stigma. 