Models 3 and 4 included only the 1008 observations for which ESR values were available. Models 3 and 4 included only the 1008 observations for which ESR values were available. It follows that systemic immunological changes during pregnancy may render pregnant women more susceptible to new hookworm infections or to greater morbidity from existing infections.Eosinophils may be dampened during pregnancy because the cost of lowering protection against hookworm infection is outweighed by the danger of harming the fetus with “friendly fire” from the maternal immune system. This additional cost to maternal resources in the first trimester may have long-term developmental costs for offspring, as well as immediate costs to maternal well-being. Many of the same immune responses that respond to helminths, such as eosinophils and IgE, are also activated in allergic responses. 4.5 |Limitations of current studyThe use of secondary data for these analyses creates several limitations. However, explicit data on lactation were not collected in this study. Though inexact, parasite load is often indirectly assessed through fecal egg counts, which were not reliably available for this study; we instead relied on a binary presence/absence of eggs or larvae. Additionally, as we were limited to only a single fecal sample per clinic visit from study participants, our analysis likely includes some false negative diagnoses. Consequently, the clinical hemoglobin threshold for diagnosing anemia is lowered from 12 to 11 g/dL to accommodate the hemoglobin nadir near the end of the second trimester. Hookworm infection is a common cause of anemia, a deficiency in functional red blood cells that leads to poor tissue oxygenation and subsequent symptoms such as fatigue, particularly among reproductive-aged women (Aphijirawat et al , 2011). The Tsimane health environment differs from industrialized contexts by its high pathogen burden, including endemic hookworm, energetic limitations, and high fertility (Blackwell, Trumble, Suarez, Stieglitz, et al , 2016; Costa, Trumble, Kaplan, & Gurven, 2018). 2.2 |Data collectionMixed cross-sectional and longitudinal data were collected between 2005 and 2014 by the on-going Tsimane Health and Life History Project (THLHP) (Gurven et al , 2017). Data collection followed the standard THLHP protocol (explained in detail in Blackwell et al , 2011; Blackwell, Tamayo, Beheim, Trumble, Stieglitz, et al , 2015; Martin, Blackwell, Gurven, & Kaplan, 2013; Blackwell, Trumble, Suarez, Beheim, et al , 2016; Gurven, Trumble, et al , 2016). Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) as a marker of generalized inflammation (Erikssen et al , 2000) was calculated using the Westergren (1957) method. For clinic visits with associated parasite data, mean levels of hemoglobin, WBC count, and reproductive state did not differ from clinic visits without parasite data (n = 2470). Informed consent was obtained at both the community and individual participant levels. 