The fixed samples were rinsed twice with 1X phosphate buffered saline (PBS), treated with 0.1 % Triton-X (1–2 minutes), rinsed with 1X PBS followed by the infusion of a mixture of DAPI and rhodamine phalloidin (30 minutes) and a final wash step with 1X PBS. To maintain the seal when connected to macro-scale plumbing, typical microfluidic devices are permanently bonded or vacuum sealed23 to glass or a layer of PDMS to prevent leaks. Figure 2d shows the comparison between the theoretical results (solid lines) and experimental results for two “gel cage” geometries. With this wide range of stimuli and morphological responses they elicit this serves as a model system to demonstrate the unique capabilities of our μFD. ECs invade 3D matrix to form capillary-like structures reminiscent of sprouting angiogenesisHMVEC-ad were cultured until sub-confluence on a collagen coated flask in EGM-2MV complete media, harvested and subsequently cultured in the μFD. Time–lapse imaging shows a “lead-cell” as it invades the underlying 3D collagen matrix. The main challenge has been to provide a model system that accurately mimics key features of the in vivo microenvironment yet provides means for continuous observation and control. The integration of 3D scaffolds and microfluidic networks permits the control of the fluidic environment with the benefit of a more in vivo –like 3D micro-architecture and high-quality imaging capabilities for dynamic studies. We demonstrate the flexibility of this system in three separate EC capillary morphogenesis assays. 5), ECs form multi-cellular cords and isolated ring structures, while ECs that predominately migrate in a 2D manner (against hard substrate into a 3D matrix region) form tube and sheet-like structures (Fig. We know of no in vitro angiogenesis models and microfluidic systems which couple microfabricated technology with the basic concepts of traditional 3D in vitro angiogenesis models and that are geared towards promoting and studying capillary morphogenesis in response the relevant biochemical and biophysical features present in vivo. Gradient studies were performed under static (no flow) (Fig. 2c) and dynamic (flow through the channels) conditions (detailed in supplementary material) with the media in one microchannel replaced by a dilute solution of fluorescent dextran (40 kDa, Invitrogen) at an initial concentration of 20 μg ml−1. Cells maintained in cultures for several days in complete media or media supplemented with bFGF/VEGF/PMA cocktail which were replenished at 24 hour time points. 