Each volunteer provided written informed consent before study enrolment, and the study was registered in the clinicaltrials.- gov database (identifier NCT00661674).All study sessions were conducted by a blinded research assistant (N.D.) and supervised by an unblinded physician (L.C.) One dimension of addiction is physical dependence, which can be modeled in rodents. The distribution of the naloxone-induced withdrawal behavior was compared with the pattern of genetic variation across the 18 strains analyzed. We chose to measure sensitization to a mechanical stimulus as this provides a robust degree of sensitization [14]. Although not tested for opioids specifically, ondansetron microinjection into the mouse amygdala (and dorsal raphe) blocked an aversive behavior (light/dark exploration) exhibited by rodents during withdrawal from nicotine, cocaine, benzodiazepines, and ethanol [38]. Naloxone (Sigma Chemical) 10 mg/kg was injected s.c. in 50 μl of NaCl as described previously by our laboratory and others [8,9]. For systemic administration, ondansetron was injected s.c. in 100 μl volumes of 0.9% NaCl to some groups of mice. When no response was obtained the next stiffest fiber in the series was applied to the same paw; if a response was obtained a less stiff fiber was applied. On Days 2, 4, and 6, the Mice received saline injections and were placed in the alternative compartment after 25 min. On Day 7, mice were placed in the middle neutral compartment of the place preference apparatus with full access to the other two compartments and assessed for the length of time spent in each compartment (postconditioning report). The haplotype blocks are then ranked based upon the calculated P value. From this analysis, the candidate haplotype blocks empirically selected for further analysis had the best P values. Dissected tissue was then quick frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at −80°C until use. Incubation was then carried out at 42°C for 60 min followed by heat inactivation at 70°C. Briefly, 2 μl of a mixture of 2x Sybr Green and primers were loaded with 2 μl diluted cDNA template in each well. The slides were then brought directly to the PixCell LCM instrument (Arcturus, Mountain View, California, USA), with a 15-μm laser spot diameter, power of 40 mW and 500-μs pulse duration to transfer tissue to the CapSure matrix (Arcturus). Each cap was used until 80−90% of the surface contained transferred tissue. 