Competition of [3H]CP-55,940 Binding by RaloxifeneIn order to investigate whether raloxifene bind to the CB2 receptor, we performed competition ligand binding experiments using membranes prepared from HEK293 cells stably transfected with CB2. As a result, there is a decrease in intracellular cAMP levels which was measured as an increase in HTRF signal in this study. In an attempt to discover novel ligands for CB2, each compound from a chemical library containing 640 FDA-approved drugs was tested for its ability to activate CB2 using the validated HTRF cAMP assay. If a compound is an agonist, it will inhibit the forskolin-stimulated cAMP response, which is shown as an increase in HTRF signal. In contrast, if a compound is an inverse agonist, it will further increase the forskolin-stimulated cAMP response, which is characterized as a decrease in HTRF signal. Similarly, raloxifene was able to compete, in a concentration-dependent manner, for specific [3H]CP-55,940 binding to CB2. These data further demonstrate that raloxifene acted on the same receptor as the cannabinoid agonist CP-55,940. Raloxifene belongs to the class of selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs), which exhibit estrogen agonist activity in some target tissues while exert estrogen antagonist activity in other tissues [14,15]. The results form the MORE trial demonstrated that raloxifene reduced the incidence of new vertebral fractures by 30% and 50% (in women with and without prevalent vertebral fractures, respectively) compared to placebo [14,15]. The biological actions of raloxifene are well known to be mediated through binding to estrogen receptors [14,15]. 384-well, round bottom, low volume white plates were purchased from Grenier Bio One (Monroe, NC). The bound [3H]CP55940 was determined by liquid scintillation counting in 5 ml of CytoScint liquid scintillation fluid (MP Biomedicals, Solon, Ohio, USA). Data AnalysisData analyses for cell-based HTRF cAMP assays were performed based on the ratio of fluorescence intensity of each well at 620 nm and 665 nm. Because CB2 ligands have a wide range of therapeutic potentials, many novel agonists and antagonists for CB2 receptors have been synthesized by pharmaceutical industry as well as academic laboratories [5,6]. For this purpose, we tested the effect of DMSO at concentrations ranging from 0.01% to 100 %. 