Numerous puncta surrounded unstained somata of pyramidal neurons, especially in layers II/III and V (Fig. At high magnification, pyramidal cell somata were covered by a thin layer of PMCA2-positive/PMCA2a-negative staining, likely representing PMCA2b at the somatic plasma membrane (inset in Fig. We concluded that PMCA2a concentrated in a subpopulation of inhibitory axon terminals, but not in excitatory terminals. Neuronal somata were immunonegative for PMCA2a, but numerous puncta were double-labeled for PMCA2a and GABA; these could be seen surrounding both GABA-positive and GABA-negative somata (Fig. In epithelial cells the A-splice-site insert regulates PMCA2 targeting to the apical membrane (Chicka and Strehler, 2003). It shows positive binding with GABA, and GABA-KLH in a dot blot assay, and negative binding with bovine serum albumin (BSA) (manufacturer's technical information).For parvalbumin, a monoclonal anti-parvalbumin antibody (Sigma, PARV-19, P-3088) was used. Twelve male Sprague–Dawley rats (200–350 g, Charles River, Raleigh, NC) were used for this study. Single labelingFree-floating sections were permeabilized with 50% ethanol for 30 minutes and then treated for 30 minutes with 3% H2O2 in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, 0.1 M, pH 7.4). After pre-incubation in 10% normal donkey serum (NDS, to block secondary antibody binding sites), sections were incubated in primary antibody overnight on a shaker at room temperature. We used the primary antibodies at a concentration so low that antigen consistently failed to be revealed by a conventional fluorophore-conjugated secondary antibody (donkey antirabbit IgG conjugated to FITC; 1:200 for 3 hours, Jackson), but was still clearly detectable with TSA. Immunoreacted tissue was rinsed in PB, postfixed 1 hour in 1% osmium tetroxide, rinsed in PB, rinsed in 0.1 M maleate buffer (MB; pH 6), stained en bloc for 1 hour in 1% uranyl acetate in MB, rinsed, then dehydrated in a graded ethanol series followed by propylene oxide, infiltrated with a mixture of Epon and Spurr resins, embedded between two sheets of Aclar plastic supported by glass slides, and polymerized at 60°C for 36–48 hours. 