Given our cohorts were naturally occurring (e.g., age) we expected cohort differences to emerge as cohort 1 (14 year olds) are likely different in terms of binge drinking compared to, say, cohort 4 (17 year olds). Results indicated no significant cohort differences (see Table 2 weighted models), indicating we can treat our data as one continuous cohort (age 15–25). Thus, we seek to understand how certain transitions (e.g., adolescence to young adulthood) are embedded into individual trajectories (e.g., binge drinking) that help point to important periods of life, which may reflect increases or decreases in functioning (e.g., variation in binge drinking trajectories based on age related transitions) (Rutter 1996). First, we considered limiting the number of control variables used in the model as our model utilized both propensity weighting and the weighting variables as controls for each model (doubly robust). Results of our model resulted in better model fit (expected given fewer parameters to estimate; CFI = .998, RMSEA = .028, SRMR = .030) with no changes to parameter estimates in both the overall and developmental model. Results of our models directly replicated our findings in both significance and direction of effects. However, it appears that beta estimates were slightly higher when excluding parent/caregiver data. Finally, post-hoc mediation analyses point to an important developmental difference between adolescence and young adulthood. Specifically, it may be that the current sample of early-onset juvenile offenders have initial deficits in self-control, thus putting them at greater risk for subsequent deviant behaviors (i.e., binge drinking) and further victimization. Participants (Table 1) were predominantly male (87%), low socio-economic status (e.g., 80% of parents held a high school degree or less), and ethnically diverse with 41% participants identifying as African American, 34% as Hispanic, 21% as White, and 4% as Other. Example items include “have you been chased when you thought the person chasing you would hurt you in the past 12 months,” “have you been sexually assaulted,” and “have you been attacked with a weapon?” Reliability estimates range from α = .68 to 0.79. 