Changes in GlyT1 activity have been shown to alter both glutamatergic transmission (Martina et al , 2005) and long term potentiation (LTP) (Martina et al , 2004), in a manner that is hypothesized to depend on the role of glycine as a co-agonist of NMDA receptors. We also studied the effects of taurine, a lower affinity (yet specific) glycine receptor agonist, on RDE. Across a population of 7 cells, we found that the mean excitability significantly increases (Fig. These results suggest that the second messenger cascade triggering RDE may be calcium mediated or could be calcium alone. 6b, c; blue; average depression = 0.56 ± 0.006), as shown in a sample trace in Fig. 6c; white; average depression = 1.1 ± 0.01) prevented LTD. Our results demonstrate a previously undetected form of modulation of glycinergic transmission in the hippocampus. The receptors are abundant in stratum pyramidale and proximal stratum radiatum (Danglot et al , 2004), a location through which excitatory signals would pass, and therefore be affected by the shunt from these receptors. Given that RDE has a rapid offset (< 100 ms) and that bath-applied glycine prevents RDE, reduced GlyR sensitivity seems a more likely explanation than receptor trafficking. This result suggests that upregulation of transport (Model 3) at presynaptic glycinergic terminals may also contribute to RDE. Three pieces of evidence suggest that RDE may contribute to the frequency-dependent LTD we observed. Other possible candidates include endogenous cannabinoids anandamide (AEA) and 2-AG which are known to block GlyRs (Lozovaya et al , 2005), and AEA which also directly up-regulates glycine transport (Pearlman et al , 2003). It is important to note that our study was carried out in animals aged P14- P21. ElectrophysiologyPyramidal neurons in CA1 were identified visually and recorded with whole-cell patch clamp recording techniques using infrared differential-interference contrast (DIC) visualization (Axioskop 2 FS; Carl Zeiss Inc., Germany). Characterizing glycine receptors (GlyRs) in hippocampusWe studied the basic properties of postsynaptic glycine receptors (GlyRs) known to be present in hippocampus (Racca et al , 1998; Chattipakorn and McMahon, 2002). While the source of glycine in the hippocampus remains unclear, calbindin-, calretinin-, and parvalbumin-positive interneurons in the CA1 are hypothesized to co-release GABA and glycine (Danglot et al , 2004), which are carried by the same vesicular transporter (Wojcik et al , 2006). 