QoL is generally referred to a measure of wellbeing which reflects the positive aspects of an individual’s life including life satisfaction, good health and a sense of meaning which cannot be identified by laboratory tests [5, 6]. There was no strong imbalance in the total sample (56% women), but was more imbalanced in the U.S. sample (67% women). > 10,000 older people or national sample) [10] and the majority of these (n = 5) had a strong gender imbalance (i.e. Therefore, accounting for the reliable and valid data of sociodemographic factors, health-related behaviours and some clinical measures based on medical records rather than self-reporting in our adjusted Cox-proportional hazards models was another strength of this study. Clinical implicationsOur sample of community-dwelling older people initially free of known major life-limiting diseases is unique as it represents relatively healthy older individuals who will be increasingly seen in primary health settings with an aging population. < 4.2% representation of one gender) while others had a very short follow-up period from 1 to 2.5 years [10]. The ASPREE inclusion criteria were initially healthy individuals aged ≥ 70 years, or aged ≥ 65 years for U.S. minority (i.e. Additionally, in Australia, the vital status was checked and verified on a weekly basis through the Ryerson Index, a community-maintained on-line index of Australian death notices [21]. Physical capacity was the longest amount of time walking outside home without any rest in the last 2 weeks was assessed and defined as (a) none, (b) ≤ 15 min, (c) 16–30 min, or (d) > 30 min). The clinical measures collected using interviews and/or clinical examination included personal cancer history (yes/no); hypertension (yes/no based on whether the participants were using treatment for high blood pressure or whether the average of three blood pressure measurements was above the normal range i.e. Additionally, body mass index (BMI) was calculated by dividing weight in kilograms by height in meters squared and then analysed as (a) underweight (BMI: less than 18.5), (b) normal weight (BMI: 18.5 to 24.9), (c) overweight (BMI: 25 to 29.9), or (d) obese (BMI: 30 or more) [24]. Additionally, body mass index (BMI) was calculated by dividing weight in kilograms by height in meters squared and then analysed as (a) underweight (BMI: less than 18.5), (b) normal weight (BMI: 18.5 to 24.9), (c) overweight (BMI: 25 to 29.9), or (d) obese (BMI: 30 or more) [24]. Statistical analysisChi-square test, t-test and Wilcoxon rank-sum test were used to identify PCS, MCS, sociodemographic, health-related behaviours and clinical measures differences by survival status. The hazards ratios were estimated for every 10-unit increase in PCS/MCS.The multivariable models adjusted for age, gender, education, living situation, smoking, alcohol, longest amount of time walking outside home without any rest, cancer history, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, BMI, and 3MS. The interaction terms between PCS/MCS and gender (men and women) or country (Australia and the U.S.) were fitted in the multivariable Cox models to test the heterogeneity of these associations (p-value for interaction). 