Whereas the Baron and Kenny method detects an indirect effect by a reduction in size of the direct path after a mediator is added to a model, bootstrapping estimates an indirect-effect standard error that provides a criterion for statistical significance (MacKinnon, Lockwood, Hoffman, West, & Sheets, 2002; Preacher & Hayes, 2004). The arrows on the left represent path A, where self-regulation in preschool was estimated as a predictor of self-regulation at school age. In Figure 4, the statistics for path A were the same in mediation models predicting hyperactivity and inattention (b = −0.07, SE = 0.02, p < .01). The standardized coefficient for this indirect effect was −0.06. Additionally, our findings help bridge separate literatures on different self-regulation constructs (Nigg, 2017), and our results add to the existing literature, which has not extensively examined various self-regulation constructs during the transition from early to middle childhood. Like lower-level EF, the temporal focus for EC (e.g., waiting 1 minute to open a gift) is more immediate. Future research on other types of self-regulation across early and middle childhood is needed. To our knowledge, the existing literature on children’s self-regulation tends to focus on self-regulatory processes within early childhood rather than across early and middle childhood. Previous research has rarely tested for longitudinal relations across different types of self-regulation during early and middle childhood (Harms, Zayas, Meltzoff, & Carlson, 2014; Raver, McCoy, & Lowenstein, 2013), although this would help clarify the use of different types of self-regulatory terms (Jones, Bailey, Barnes, & Partee, 2016; Morrison & Grammer, 2016; Nigg, 2017). Here, we take a first step at examining these links by capturing friendship quality specifically in terms of caring behavior between friends, which involves peers validating other children’s skills, ideas, and worth (Parker & Asher, 1993). Children and their families and teachers participated in additional waves, and the current study includes data from 4 and 6 years after baseline. 