Most women were obese (80.6%) and had at least one comorbid condition (75%). Findings from a recent large multicenter trial of survivors (N = 692; blacks = 71) suggest that a behavioral intervention may support clinically meaningful weight loss. They also valued the usefulness of the materials and the prospect of applying their learning more broadly. Empirical data from studies with white survivors suggest that interventions are more effective when they are multifaceted, personalized, teach behavioral skills, provide social support, and increase self-efficacy [27,28]. Changes in cardiovascular fitness are typically expected after at least 6 months of regular physical activity. Because we did not collect dietary data beyond baseline in the control group we do not know what dietary changes (if any) were made in this group. Approaches are needed to improve physical activity, diet, and sustain the health benefits of behavior change and many Black survivors appear ready to make that change, as one participant stated: “This is the next step in making sure you're living a more healthy life.” As black survivors have lower levels of physical activity post diagnosis compared to their white counterparts, study data will be used to inform the delivery of trials in this group. After, the CRA conducted a phone interview and mailed additional materials to be completed by participants. The nutritionist would assist her in identifying healthier meal options that her family may also be willing to try. Participants were given pedometers, notebooks, individualized step goals that gradually increased toward meeting and maintaining a goal of 10,000 steps/day for 12 weeks, tools to monitor and track their daily food intake, and binders to store resources and session materials. Data collection and measurementsA trained CRA administered a standardized survey and an exercise physiologist took anthropometric measures and facilitated the maximal oxygen treadmill (VO2max) test. Dietary intake, including daily energy intake, percentage of energy from fat, and grams of fat and fiber, was assessed using 4-day food intake records that were reviewed for accuracy and completeness prior to analysis using the NDS-R nutritional analysis software (NDS-R, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN).3.1.3. Cardiovascular fitness was determined by a graded exercise test using the multistage treadmill Bruce Protocol. An item regarding their information sharing behavior was also included. The focus group guide included semi-structured questions that elicited participant's experiences during each phase and component of the project and lasted 1.5 h. Participants received a $10.00 gift card. Two members of the research team identified main themes (e.g., positive and negative aspects of the intervention). Each main theme was summarized and exemplified using quotes from the participants. Change scores were computed for anthropometric, physical activity, and cardiovascular fitness variables by subtracting the baseline scores from the score at 12 weeks. 