Almost all animals in which bursicon-expressing neurons were suppressed by transfer to 31°C between days 5-7 APF had unexpanded wings. Preparations in which only BSEG neurons (Fig 5A) were labeled consistently showed GFP-labeled processes that ramified throughout the CNS. Fibers with bursicon-immunoreactive varicosities that are characteristically found in the abdominal nerves of both control and mutant animals five minutes after eclosion (Fig. Burs-Gal4 constructs and transgenic Drosophila linesPCR primers (P252F 5′-TGATTAGCCAATAAGTTGTGAGG-3′ and P252R 5′CTCGTCGGCCCGACTGCGA-3′) were designed to amplify the 252 bp region between the ATG start codon of burs and the stop codon of the nearest predicted coding sequence upstream of it. At least six preparations were analyzed at each time point by confocal microscopy, and surviving cells were identified from analysis of multiple image planes of confocal Z-series, where they could easily be distinguished from cellular debris, which typically formed smaller immunoreactive spots. To detect DNA fragmentation as a marker of apoptosis, TUNEL labeling was performed on central nervous system preparations excised from animals sacrificed six hours after eclosion. To represent the intensity and frequency of labeling of individual identified neurons with each driver, we created consensus expression patterns derived from multiple CNS preparations of each genotype. Abdominal Contraction and Air SwallowingExperimental animals were isolated as wandering 3rd instar larvae and transferred to individual food vials to complete development. We used the putative promoter/enhancer region of the gene encoding the bursicon α-subunit (also known as burs) to drive expression of Gal4 in bursicon-expressing neurons in transgenic flies as described in Materials and Methods. 1).As shown in Figure 1 (A-B, D), Burs-Gal4 driven UAS-EGFP expression in the central nervous system of the third larval stage largely overlaps with the pattern of immunoreactivity obtained by staining with an anti-burs antibody. Most of the neurons that express the burs subunit alone are also CCAP-immunopositive (data not shown) and are included in the pattern of Burs-Gal4 expression.The pattern of burs expression becomes more restricted in the pharate adult (Fig. 