Standard informed consent for research was obtained in writing from all patients who contributed to this study before tissue procurement and all experiments followed relevant guidelines and regulations. Principal component analysis, t-SNE, unsupervised graph-based clustering, statistical testing, and the pseudotime trajectory for all scRNA-seq analyses are described in Supplementary Methods and Supplementary Data 1. Subsequent analysis is described in Supplementary Methods and Supplementary Data 1. Antibodies used for immunocytochemistry staining following standard staining protocols39 are listed in Supplementary Methods and images were acquired on a Leica-SP8 confocal microscope. 3D rendering of confocal image stacks was performed using Volocity Image Analysis software (Quorum Technologies Inc., Guelph, Ontario). 4h, which required five colours, cilia were distinguished by staining with two fluorescent secondary antibodies and merging the colocalized voxels into a pseudocoloured channel using Volocity software. Live-imaging and confocal microscopy of immobilized apical-out lung organoidsLive organoids were held between two coverslips in a viewing chamber (Lab-Tek II two-chambered coverglass) and filmed using a Nikon TE2000E microscope using differential interference contrast (DIC) microscopy with a 63× objective. Statistics and reproducibilityUnless stated otherwise, all data are representative of at least two independent experiments with each independent experiment carried out using an organoid culture derived from one individual. b, Brightfield microscopy evaluation of required exogenous growth factors and automated organoid quantitation after day 10 of chemically defined organoid culture with specified recombinant growth factors, N = Noggin, E = EGF, W = WNT3A, R = RSPO1, n = 4 per condition, data are mean ± s.e.m., * = P < 0.05, two-tailed student’s t-test, scale bar = 500 μm. b, Intracellular FACS measurement of KRT5 protein expression in Basal 1 and 2 fractions from a. c, Representative brightfield of day 14 organoid cultures from a, b. d, Quantitation of 3 independent experiments from a–c, box plot represents first quartile, median, third quartile, and whiskers represent minimum and maximum. The nucleoside analogue FdC demonstrated dose dependent activity with IC50 of 340 nM as compared to neuraminidase inhibitor zanamivir, which only impairs viral shedding but not infectivity and replication. 1q, Supplementary Data 1, Supplementary Table 3). supp methods and refs 