The concept of atypical or malignant chondroblastoma has been controversial; reflecting this controversy, chondroblastoma had been classified as a tumor of intermediate biologic potential in the 4th edition of the World Health Organization classification [3], and it was reclassified as a benign neoplasm in the 5th edition [4]. Case selectionThe archives of Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Massachusetts General Hospital, and Stanford Hospital were searched for cases containing “chondroblastoma-like osteosarcoma” in the diagnostic top line or report text, as well as cases containing “chondroblastoma” along with terms “atypical,” “malignant” or “metastatic.” Two cases were published previously [8, 9]. This study was approved by the institutional review boards of the authors’ institutions.Sixteen candidate cases were found; hematoxylin and eosin-stained slides and immunohistochemistry (IHC) were re-reviewed concurrently by four co-authors (JLH, GPN, YPH and DJP). One had no additional mutations; the other had a nonsense SETD2 K1937* mutation and copy number gains and losses on chromosomes 9 and 10. More work is needed to determine whether histone H3 methylation abnormalities are a recurrent feature of chondroblastoma-like osteosarcoma. More work is needed to determine whether histone H3 methylation abnormalities are a recurrent feature of chondroblastoma-like osteosarcoma. Immunohistochemistry and molecular studies were used to support diagnoses when available.Imaging studies were reviewed by a musculoskeletal radiologist (MAB). Integrated case review with clinicopathologic featuresUpon re-review, 7 of 11 tumors were classified as malignant chondroblastoma and 4 of 11 were classified as chondroblastoma-like osteosarcoma (Table 1). The existence of atypical or malignant chondroblastoma has been controversial, and chondroblastoma has been re-classified from a tumor of intermediate biologic potential in the 4th edition of the World Health Organization classification to a benign neoplasm in the 5th edition [3, 4]. Tumor recurrence demonstrated lytic expansile lesions with cortical destruction and associated soft tissue mass. One patient with a rib primary (case 1) who developed recurrence also developed femur, hip soft tissue, scalp, chin, and cerebellar metastases over a 26-year period (Fig. In contrast to chondroblastoma-like osteosarcoma, no tumors exhibited bone production by cytologically malignant cells.IHC was positive for H3K36M in 6 of 7 cases (Figs. Case 4 had the H3F3B K36M missense mutation (35% allele fraction) and additionally was found to harbor SETD2 K1937* nonsense mutation (26% allele fraction) and copy number gains and losses in chromosomes 9 and 10. Two occurred in males and two occurred in females, with a median age at presentation of 21 years (range: 19–40 years). The second patient who died of disease had a scapular primary tumor and developed widespread metastases including metastases to the lungs (interval after initial diagnosis: 4, 8, and 13 years), distal humerus (23 years), skull (24 years), and brain (25 years).The chondroblastoma-like osteosarcomas were found on consensus review to contain regions of cytologically malignant cells producing bone, distinguishing them from malignant chondroblastoma. All four tumors exhibited more striking cytologic atypia than the malignant chondroblastomas. 