However, area strains and circumferential strains began decaying immediately after EIVC to approach zero at around EIVR. While they appeared to have similar mean area strains, free edge strains were larger on average in the radial direction, while mean belly strains were larger in the circumferential direction. Moreover, we found that radial strains were larger than circumferential strains (p = 0.044). We found that strain magnitudes and patterns vary between leaflets, but, because of large deviations, could not confirm statistically that they vary between locations. However, we did confirm that strains are larger in the radial direction than in the circumferential direction, i.e., strains are anisotropic. Among future studies, we plan on performing similar experiments on a larger cohort of animals to reduce uncertainty. To gain access to the heart, we performed a median sternotomy and subsequently prepared the animals for cardiopulmonary bypass. Subsequently, we exteriorized the valvular crystal wires through a right atriotomy and placed pressure transducers (PA4.5-X6; Konigsberg Instruments, Inc., Pasadena, CA, USA) in the right atrium and through the apex in the left and right ventricles. Note, we used the subdivided surfaces primarily to ease visualization, but performed all quantitative analyses on the original mesh. 2a), mid-belly crystal (ii), free edge crystals (v), and averaged the two lateral crystal locations (iii, iv), for each leaflet. Subsequently, we computed the angle between this line and the least-squares plane fit to the annular markers for each time point and each leaflet. Specifically, for both the original triangular mesh and for the smoothed mesh, we interpolated each triangular element via linear shape functions in terms of the local curvilinear coordinates θα, with α= 1, 2; see Eq. (1)X(θ1,θ2)=∑i=1nNi(θ1,θ2)Xiandx(θ1,θ2)=∑i=1nNi(θ1,θ2)xi,Furthermore, Ni(θ1, θ2) are aforementioned linear shape functions, and Xi and xi are the crystal coordinates in the reference configuration and spatial configuration, respectively. Strains of the belly region and the free edge region over time are depicted in Fig. We observed that mean belly strains appeared generally larger than mean free edge strains. While belly strains were positive throughout systole and deviated marginally from zero during diastole, free edge strains were either small (area and circumferential strain) or negative (radial strain) during systole. 