This statistic sums over the overlaps (products) of BCR sequence read counts, scaled by a measure of the diversity within each sample: 1 as completely different and 0 as identical. Within the IgM+IgD+ repertoire the most highly abundant BCRs were shared among all replicates, while the BCRs that were highest in the IgM−IgD− repertoire were more variable and most were expressed in only one or two mice, confirming the analysis with the Morisita-Horn index (Fig. While we found a slight increase in the proportion of BCRs containing a single mutation in the switched repertoire (up to 4.2% from 0.1%), we did not observe signs of accumulated somatic hypermutation (Fig. As a further confirmation, we analyzed full-length BCR sequences of light chains cloned from the IgM+IgD+ and IgM−IgD− repertoires (60 sequences from each repertoire). Using transgenic mice expressing antigen-specific IgM, IgG or a chimeric IgM with the IgG cytoplasmic tail, Martin and Goodnow showed that the IgG tail greatly enhanced the survival of progeny cells, leading to expanded numbers(Martin and Goodnow, 2002). 2 μl of the 1st round PCR product was used as the template for the 2nd round PCR. 2 μl of the 1st round PCR product was used as the template for the 2nd round PCR. PCR products were gel purified, mixed at equimolar ratios, and submitted to University of Chicago Functional Genomics Facility for quality control and sequencing on the Illumina HiSeq (1×150bp). Only unique V-J-CDR3 amino acid combinations that comprised at least 0.1% of the total counts in any sample were included in the principal components analysis (PCA). The 3H9 transgenic mice exhibit excellent heavy chain allelic exclusion, and the contribution of endogenous light chains to 3H9 binding specificities is well characterized, facilitating analysis of alterations in polyclonal repertoire. Our sequencing covered broad a range of Igκ families, although certain Igκ families (Vκ2, Vκ11, Vκ13, Vκ11) were under-represented due to mismatches of the PCR forward primer with these particular V genes. 