The results are described using simple proportions, without any statistical testing. A test for comparing paired proportions would be more appropriate for a pre-test–post-test study27 but this was not possible, given the data limitations.A separate section of the questionnaire assessed household socioeconomic status (SES). For the sample of the general rural population, the index was specified such that it had a zero mean and standard deviation equal to one. These interviews were conducted in December 2004 and between June and September 2005. These interviews were conducted in December 2004 and between June and September 2005. We also conducted 5 focus group discussions (FGDs) with aagewans from all 8 of the subdistricts in December 2004. All of the qualitative interviews were conducted in Gujarati and were video-recorded, with the permission of the participants. The interviews and FGDs were later translated into English, transcribed by the interviewers, and coded in MicrosoftWord. However, even under the PPS, user fees continue to pose a financial barrier to the insured—they have to mobilize funds to cover the costs of medicines, supplies, registration fee, etc. This may never be possible at public hospitals, where the bulk of the expenditure may actually be on drugs and supplies purchased from a variety of sources outside the hospital, and where there may be no infrastructure for recording costs, billing the insurer, accepting advance payments, etc. GeneralizabilityThis pilot project provides useful lessons relating to strategic purchasing by CBHI schemes and, more broadly, managed care in India, in a context where the insurance scheme is separate from healthcare providers. Nonetheless, it is a positive finding that facilities selected on the basis of structural indicators were readily accepted by members, with a dramatic increase in utilization of the selected hospitals.The other main design features of the PPS, i.e. This is most relevant for other small CBHI schemes that have wide membership, which means that large-scale tie-ups are not possible. These ‘annual members’ remain eligible for hospitalization benefits until 70 years of age, provided that they remain insured every year after the age of 55. The PPS differs from the traditional system of Vimo SEWA in that members are provided with cash benefits before discharge from hospital and elements of managed care are employed, such as profiling and selecting PPS hospitals on the basis of quality indicators, and restricting PPS benefits to episodes of hospitalization at the selected hospitals. The quality of inpatient care accessed under the insurance scheme was also a problem. We provided hospital administrators with (i) written material about the Vimo SEWA scheme; (ii) written material about how the PPS would work; and (iii) telephone numbers for the local representative and Vimo SEWA administrative staff at the district and central level. 