The odds ratios for watching cultural/ political TV programs and going to the movies and exhibitions were even larger at, respectively 2.39 and 3.05. We conceive of cultural capital not in terms of national norms, values, language and traditions but as the production or consumption of aesthetics – visual and performing art, music, and literature. Pierre Bourdieu referred to cultural capital as consisting of distinguishing tastes and practices acquired or accumulated differently by people over the course of their life much as economic capital (Bourdieu 1984; Bourdieu 1985). In the second stage, a sample of households was drawn systematically from the household lists of the selected PSUs in each community.The instrument consisted of two questionnaires: one for the household and one for ever-married women aged 15–59 at the time of the survey. Maternal-related VariablesFour indicators were used to measure cultural participation: exposure to entertainment TV programs, exposure to cultural/political TV programs, art production, and art consumption. For watching TV programs, we asked mothers how many times per month they watched any of the following types of programs: 1) drama or comedy 2) singing or dancing shows 3) folklore 4) news or political debates. Drama, comedy, singing and dancing shows were recoded as entertainment TV programs, and folklore programs along with the news or political debates were recoded as political/cultural TV programs.Participation in art production was constructed by combining the respondent’s replies to whether or not she 1) played a musical instrument, 2) participated in a singing show, play, or dance, 3) volunteered in cultural or artistic organization, and 4) made art objects or crafts like sculpture, paintings, etc… Answering “yes” to any of these activities indicates that the respondent was involved in doing artistic work, i.e. The consumption of art was measured by asking the respondents whether or not they go to movies or attend art exhibitions, regardless of type of exhibition or movie. The actual monetary family income was categorized as “lowest to 6000” and “6001 to highest.” Then, those in the low income category were subdivided as having “low income” and “low income on welfare”.Engagement in civil society groups was used as an indicator of social capital. Quality of water was measured by asking respondents whether or not they perceived the quality of potable and domestic water that they use as turbid or clear. The majority reported completing elementary levels (46%) or no education (19.8), and over half reported having low yearly income (less than 6 million L.L., 1,500 L.L=1 $). 