Sensitivity analyses excluding non-white individuals, as well as data points subsequent to diagnosis of AD or MCI, yielded similar findings. Our samples included a large number of participants and up to 7 serial assessments, with 3 or more measurements in more than one-third of the samples. Similarly, we found complementary longitudinal decreases in CSF Aβ1–42 of 5.51 pg/ml per year in BIOCARD, a distinct longitudinal cohort with a younger mean age. Prospective studies using both biomarkers in the same sample are necessary to test this hypothesis. Neuropsychological assessments were conducted annually and MRI scans and CSF and blood specimens were obtained approximately every 2 years. Individuals were excluded from participation if they were cognitively impaired, as determined by cognitive testing, or had significant medical, psychiatric, or neurologic disorders. Since the study has been conducted at Johns Hopkins, the clinical evaluation has included the following: a physical and neurologic examination, assessments of medication use, behavioral and mood assessments, family history of dementia, history of symptom onset, and a Clinical Dementia Rating, based on a semi-structured interview. PET data were acquired according to the following protocol for the duration of the frames: 4×0.25, 8×0.5, 9×1, 2×3, and 10×5 min (70 min total, 33 frames). Dynamic images were reconstructed using filtered back-projection with a ramp filter (image size = 128 × 128, pixel size = 2 × 2 mm, slice thickness = 4.25 mm), yielding a spatial resolution of approximately 4.5 mm FWHM at the center of the field of view.The Statistical Parametric Mapping PET template was affinely registered onto the 20-minute mean PET-PiB image for each PET scan study separately, and the resulting transformations were used to map the AAL atlas labels[25] accordingly on each PET-PiB distribution volume ratio (DVR) image. CSF measurementDetailed procedures for acquisition and measurement of CSF Aβ1–42 are described in Moghekar et al [15] Briefly, CSF was collected from 307 participants at baseline. The CSF specimens were analyzed using the same protocol used in the Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative. PET-PiB Imaging in BLSAPET-PiB cDVR showed significant cross-sectional elevations with advancing age (p = 0.002). 