The mechanistic target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) couples cell growth with the availability of biosynthetic inputs such as amino acids (1,2). It is the main precipitant at 1.15 M concentration and it could at least mimic the interaction of the carboxyl group of leucine. The leucine-binding site of Sestrin2 consists of a shallow hydrophobic pocket flanked on each side by opposing positive and negative charges contributed by Arg390 and Glu451, respectively, making it well suited to specifically accommodate zwitterionic α-amino acids with short aliphatic sidechains (6). Crystallization is, after all, a purification method and thus perfectly suited to enrich a small fraction of leucine-bound Sestrin2 in a large background of non-crystallizing apo-Sestrin. The leucine-dependent dissociation of Sestrin2 from GATOR2 represents the critical first step in the activation of mTORC1 by leucine, and understanding how leucine-binding alters the conformation of Sestrin2 to disrupt its interaction with GATOR2 remains a major open question in the field. Protein production and purificationHuman Sestrin2 was expressed and purified as described previously (6). After washing of the beads with lysis buffer, the protein was eluted in 250 mM imidazole, pH 8.0, 150 mM NaCl and 3 mM βME. Briefly, a single 2 µl drop containing crystals of Sestrin2 was diluted into a 50 µl solution of mother liquor (100 mM MES, pH 6.0, 1.2 M disodium malonate, and 1% (v/v) Jeffamine ED 2001), vortexed for 5 minutes in the presence of a polystyrene bead, then diluted again into 500 µl of mother liquor. This solution was then diluted at a ratio of 1:1,000 to obtain the final microseed stock. The phase problem was solved by molecular replacement using our published Sestrin2 structure (PDB ID: 5DJ4) as the search model in the Phaser-MR program, run as part of the Phenix Autosol program (19) (space group I23, 5 molecules per asymmetric unit). Subsequent refinement was carried out using phenix.refine. Refinement of the models either with or without bound-leucine built in was performed using phenix.refine. 