Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood samples using the GenElute™ blood genomic DNA kit (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). After several PCR reactions, a primer pair (5′-TGCTTGAACCCAGGAAGTG-3′; 5′-TCTTCCACACCCGTCACTTA-3′) was selected to amplify and sequence the deletion breakpoint. Ectropion, eclabium, and reduced sweating ability (hypohidrosis) were observed in the affected members. Haplotype analysis showed mapping of family A to TGM1and family B toALOXE3 gene. This was verified by Ssi1 (Aci1) restriction analysis of 448 bp PCR product encompassing exon 9 of TGM1 gene. This was verified by Ssi1 (Aci1) restriction analysis of 448 bp PCR product encompassing exon 9 of TGM1 gene. To determine the exact breakpoint of the underlying deletion, long range DNA polymerase (Clontech Laboratories, Mountain View, CA, USA) was used to obtain 832 and 6130 bp products from DNA samples of affected and normal individuals, respectively (Fig. However, photophobia,30 mixed dentition,31 and blepharitis32 reported in a few patients of LI were not found in our patients. Transglutaminase-1 is a catalytic membrane-bound enzyme that functions in the formation of the cornified cell envelope. In the present study the other two novel mutations (p.Arg140*, delEx1_6InsC) were identified in the ALOXE3 gene which contains 15 exons, spanning 22 kb of genomic DNA on chromosome 17p13.1. These two mutations are predicted to result in loss of function of the ALOXE3 protein either through nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) or transcription initiation failures. These two mutations are predicted to result in loss of function of the ALOXE3 protein either through nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (NMD) or transcription initiation failures. This included eight missense, three splicing, and two small deletions.34 The 843 amino acids lipoxygenase-3, encoded by ALOXE3 gene, contains the PLAT (Polycystin-1, Lipoxygenase, Alpha-Toxin) domain, the lipoxygenase homology 2 domain and a large lipoxygenase domain. The mutation (p.Arg140*) identified in family B is located in the lipoxygenase domain and could either lead to NMD or production of a truncated lipoxygenase-3 protein. The exome variant server29 has reported presence of the variant p.Arg140* in the heterozygous state only in a single African-American (AA = 0; AG = 1; GG = 6502). However, the absence of ARCI phenotype in individuals heterozygous for p.Arg140* variant, in our family, clearly ruled out its pathogenicity in the heterozygous state. 