3A).To establish the reference distribution for the mean trace density F-ST, we used a randomisation procedure. These random trace densities were then averaged to yield an estimate for the mean trace density of a random set of the same number of voxels in the same distance as the termination zone. A Z-score of 0 indicates that it is equally likely to find a higher or a lower mean trace density at that distance by chance. A positive Z-score points towards a termination zone that receives more traces than expected by chance in the same distance from the seed. Instead, it implements a reference distribution of how many trace counts could be expected by chance at a given distance and describes the observed effects relative to this reference.Consistency of these findings across subjects was then tested for by means of one-sample T-tests performed separately for each seed-target combination (p<0.001; Bonferroni-corrected for multiple comparisons). They predominantly follow the course of the superior longitudinal (SLF) and arcuate fascicles (AF). Where meaningfully possible, groups were further subdivided with respect to functional systems (e.g. Like probabilistic tractography for fibre paths, probabilistic atlases accommodate inter-subject variability and hence allow inclusion of uncertainty estimates into the investigation. Geschwind (1965,1970) not only highlighted the aspect of reading to be located within rostral parts of the angular gyrus, but furthermore stressed that this left IPL hub would integrate visual and auditory word forms to generate speech (Price, 2000). Quality of scanning in general was checked by routinely applied phantom measurements with retrieval of signal and noise change measures within the acquired images and the background to assure stability of the scanning protocol over time. But due to a scanning protocol with focus on optimal acquisition of high quality data, only one data set had to be removed from further analysis, leaving 39 data sets which showed minimal motion and no other artefacts for consecutive analysis. The CSF-segment obtained from segmentation of the individual b = 0 images was used as exclusion mask for probabilistic tractography to avoid tracts passing through ventricles or sulci. Statistical analysisStatistical analysis was performed using MATLAB (The Math-Works). Algorithmically, voxels forming this termination zone were identified using a stepwise threshold decrease. 