Such thin PEG layers reduce the amount of unwanted proteins at interfaces to a minimum which does not influence cell adhesion.19–22 Following the passivation, the gold nanoparticles are functionalized with the molecule of interest. where R is the gas constant, T is the temperature, φ is the volume fraction of the polymer and Ne is the number of moles of elastically effective network chains (i.e., cross-link chains) in volume V. The theory is based on the assumption that every network chain ends in a cross-link, and no loops or trapped entanglements exist. We could show previously that KG-1a cells bind to the cRGD-motif of the extracellular matrix protein fibronectin via integrins.37 Upon adhesion to nanostructured cRGD-functionalized surfaces, KG-1a cells were observed by SEM to have a roundish morphology that is typical for non-anchorage dependent cells (Figure 6 A, D). The hypothesis that the different surface properties of the two substrate sets impact cell behavior was verified by demonstrating the different adhesive behavior of non-anchorage-dependent KG-1a and anchorage-dependent REF52 cells on nanostructured hydrogel and passivated glass surfaces. Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) and Cryo-SEMA Zeiss Ultra 55 field emission electron microscope (FE-SEM) equipped with in-lens, secondary electron (SE) and angle selective backscattered electron (ASB) detectors was used for image acquisition (Zeiss SMT, Oberkochen, Germany). Therefore, in order to accurately derive the Young modulus of the PEG700-DA hydrogel samples, force distance curves were recorded from 50 different locations on the hydrogels surfaces with about 20 force curves per location (4 curves for each one of the 5 tested rates of tip approach 0.01, 0.1, 0.2, 1 and 2 μm/sec) and fitted to the modified Hertz model.41, 42, 44On the glass surfaces the scanning probe micrographs were recorded with a “Nano Wizard II” SPM commercially provided by JPK Instruments AG (Berlin, Germany) applying intermittent contact mode.45, 46 Glass substrates were measured in a dry state using hard, backside-coated silicon cantilevers (Applied NanoStructures Inc., Santa Clara, USA; ACTA; k = 40 N m−1). Functionalization of Gold NanoparticlesTo provide cell adhesion on the nanostructured PEG700-DA and PEG2000-silane passivated substrates, c(RGDfK)-PEG6-cysteine or c(RGDfK)-Ahx-thiol were immobilized on gold nanopatterns. Cells were then permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 in PBS, blocked with 5% goat serum (Invitrogen, Germany) in PBS for 1 h at room temperature and incubated with 1:100 dilution of mouse anti-paxillin (Abcam, USA) and with 1:100 dilution of rabbit anti-zyxin (Sigma-Aldrich, Germany) for 1 h at room temperature. Surface Texture of PEG700-DA Hydrogels and PEG Passivated GlassesGlass cover slips were decorated with a quasi-hexagonally ordered gold nanoparticles array, featuring defined interparticle spacings between 20 and 160 nm. 