When a global ROS reporter was used, cold storage was identified as a process that increases ROS generation,20,22 while there was no increase in the level of superoxide species,49 possibly due to SOD2 expressed by human PLT mitochondria.50 Our study confirms the observation that long-term cold storage results in dysmetabolic mitochondrial activity and ROS production, which may associate with increased inflammatory activation in vivo.51 The fact that human GPIb is recognized by mouse von Willebrand factor54,55 allows the study of bleeding time in immunodeficient mice. Our data suggest that the modified NSG mouse model presented in this report may become a useful tool for studies in which new PAS can be tested preclinically. The use of a paired (controlled) analysis side by side allows a fair comparison with a small number of pools analyzed. This can be prevented by the addition of the antioxidant NAC to a magnesium-containing PAS. In brief, whole blood units from five donors per pool were collected in anticoagulant citrate phosphate double dextrose (Acrodose Plus System; Haemonetics, Braintree, Massachusetts) at RT and processed within 8 hours after collection following the manufacturer's instructions with some modifications. 2.3 ∣In vitro phagocytosisIn vitro phagocytosis was performed as previously described.8 Briefly, monocytic THP-1 cells (ATCC, Manassas, Virginia) were cultured in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (R&D, Minneapolis, Minnesota), 2 mM glutamine (Life Technologies, Waltham, Massachusetts), 100 IU/mL penicillin and 0.1 mg/mL streptomycin (Life Technologies), and differentiated using 1 ng/mL TGF-β1 (R&D) and 50 nM 1,25-(OH)2-vitamin D3 (Sigma) for 24 hours. A P value of <.05 indicates statistically significant difference between the control and test samples. A P value of <.05 indicates statistically significant difference between the control and test samples. However, similar to membrane P-selectin expression, PAC-1 binding to activated GPIIb/IIIa was significantly increased in pooled PLTs subject to cold storage for 10 or 14 days but not to pooled PLTs stored for up to 7 days (Figure 1B). 3.4 ∣Cold storage of PRP pooled PLTs for 7 to 14 days results in increased macrophage-dependent phagocytosis partly preventable by NACCold-induced damaged PLT lesions include reorganization of membrane GPs (eg, GPIa, GPIIb/IIIa,9-11 which result in recognition and clearance by internalization (phagocytosis) mediated by macrophage integrins (αMβ2 integrin,35 or hepatocyte Ashwell-Morell receptors.36To determine the status of the macrophage-dependent phagocytosis, we analyzed macrophage-dependent PLT phagocytosis by activated THP-1 cells.9 Length of storage resulted in a modest increase of the macrophage-dependent phagocytosis of 14-day RT-stored PLTs compared with Day 1 stored PLTs (Figure 4A). 