Oncogenic signaling promoted synthesis of negative regulators, such as DUSPs and SPRY proteins, but many of these act upstream of BRAF, making negative feedback more effective against the physiological than oncogenic configuration. Experiments confirmed these predictions, which could be recapitulated with three growth factors other than EGF (Figure 5G) and with trametinib plus dabrafenib (Figure S3D). After 5 days, mice were transcardially perfused with oxygenated and heparinized Tyrode’s solution which allowed for simultaneous euthanasia and exsanguination. Flank xenografts were then surgically removed and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS and stored at 4 °C for 48 h. All fixed tumors from a single group were uniformly paraffin embedded into a single block holder and sectioned in 5 μM slices.Xenograft for Live-Cell Intravital ImagingAll animal research was performed in accordance with guidelines from the Institutional Subcommittee on Research Animal Care, and studies related to intravital microscopy were performed under approval of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at Massachusetts General Hospital. Window chambers were sealed with sterile coverslips, and mice were supplied prophylactically with drinking water containing antibiotics. Reactions were diluted four-fold with water and qPCR was performed in 10 μL reactions in 384-well plates using PowerUp SYBR Green PCR Master mix (ThermoFisher Scientific), 2 μL of diluted cDNA preparation, and 0.4 μM of primers using a QuantStudio 6 real-time PCR system (Applied Biosystems). In treated subjects, 25 mg/kg dabrafenib and 2.5 mg/kg trametinib (both from LC labs) were given by oral gavage in water with 1% DMSO and 0.5% methylcellulose, 48 hr and again 24 hr prior to the imaging session. Pan-RAF inhibitors inhibited pulsing over multiple days of drug exposure whereas SHP099 acted transiently (Figure 3B), but neither was as effective as 1-μM cobimetinib (Figures 3A and S1C). A similar biphasic response of pERK to cobimetinib was observed using three other growth factors (Figures 4I and 4J). This is surprising because protein kinase inhibitors usually act by blocking the ability of kinases to phosphorylate downstream substrates, in this case ERK, and not by blocking phosphorylation of the kinase being inhibited (i.e., MEK). 