DISE is used most frequently for the evaluation of children with persistent OSA after adenotonsillectomy (AT) and less commonly to evaluate infants with OSA. As is characteristic of retrospective studies, there is the potential for selection bias; more specifically, it is likely that children with moderate or severe OSA were more likely to be included than those with mild OSA. In addition, our sample size was not large enough to perform subgroup analysis by disease severity. As mentioned in the results section above, the lapsed time between PSGs was approximately 9 months. In light of this, DEX is often used for pediatric DISE [11] in combination with other anesthetics, such as ketamine. Despite these limitations, we feel that this study is important, as it demonstrates that obstructive sites can be consistently identified during DISE for children with REM-predominant OSA. DISE using DEX and ketamine as an anesthetic agent is a useful technique for the evaluation of upper airway obstruction in children with REM-predominant OSA without tonsillar hypertrophy. Our primary outcome was whether at least one site of obstruction could be identified in REM-predominant patients undergoing DISE. Children were excluded from this study if they were 18 years of age or older or had a preoperative obstructive apnea-hypopnea index (oAHI) of < 1 event/h or were using REM suppressant medications. All variables were recorded with the Twin® digital acquisition system (Grass Technologies, Pleasanton, CA). Drug-induced sleep endoscopyAll children underwent DISE as part of our standard evaluation to determine the site(s) of upper airway obstruction. The levels that were assessed included the internal nasal valve, nasal septum, inferior turbinates, nasopharynx (including adenoid tissue), palate orientation, velum, oropharynx, tongue base, lingual tonsils, epiglottis, supraglottis (including the false vocal cords, arytenoids and aryepiglottic folds), and the true vocal folds. Surgical interventions performed in this cohort included lingual tonsillectomy, revision adenoidectomy, partial midline glossectomy, hyoid suspension, genioglossal advancement, lateral expansion pharyngoplasty, and inferior turbinate reduction. Quantitative results were presented as mean ± standard deviation. Statistical analysis was carried out using Stata 12.0 (StataCorp LP, College Station, TX). Additionally, there was no significant difference between these 2 groups in comorbidities, including laryngomalacia (P = 0.42), Down syndrome (P = 0.69), Pierre Robin sequence (P = 0.55), or reactive airway disease (P = 0.32). There was no significant difference in the amount of total sleep time before or after surgery between groups. There was no significant difference in the amount of total sleep time before or after surgery between groups. At our institution, DEX and ketamine are also the preferred anesthetics for both DISE and CINE MRI as part of the diagnostic airway workup for children with OSA without tonsillar hypertrophy. In a previous (2007) study of 26 children with persistent OSA after AT undergoing propofol-induced sleep endoscopy, families of 92% of the children reported symptomatic improvement after DISE-directed surgery [4]. For those who had surgery (predominantly AT), the oAHI significantly improved (P = 0.001) after DISE-directed surgery [29]. In our 2017 study of 56 children without tonsillar hypertrophy (both those with persistent OSA and infants with OSA), we demonstrated significant improvements in both postoperative oAHI (P = 0.001) and oxygen saturation nadir (P < 0.001) after DISE-directed surgery [6]. Despite these findings, none of these studies assessed the impact of REM predominance on DISE-directed surgery outcomes. Although REM-predominant OSA has been identified in both children and adults, little is known about the best diagnostic and therapeutic approaches, or the long-term health consequences, for these patients [30]. 