The expression of ODD occurs only in the cardiomyocytes as a result of the specificity of the myosin light-chain promoter. Rapamycin binds to the FK-binding protein 12 (FKB12) forming a complex that binds to the mammalian targets of rapamycin (mTOR), inhibiting both DNA and protein synthesis. The expression of VEGF was sufficient to induce the formation of new blood vessels. Thus, the hypoxia-regulated production of VEGF may prevent the negative aspects of high expression of this potent angiogenic factor. Moreover, the combination of HRE-dependent regulation of VEGF expression and the cardiac-specific over-expression of HIF-1 may offer additional benefits, limiting the transgene expression only to the ischemic heart (52). In this study, mice myoblasts were stably transduced with retroviral vector harboring VEGF. It can be suggested that similar beneficial effects can be applied for the prevention of ischemia reperfusion injury in myocardial infarction (46,81). AAV-mediated delivery of EC-SOD, driven by a constitutive promoter, prevented the injury caused by myocardial infarction induced 6 wk later. As expected, hypoxia strongly induced the production of VEGF (Fig. The coming years should provide more data demonstrating the feasibility of such an approach in animal models and first clinical trials. The nonpathogenic nature of AAV decreases the risk of an inflammatory response (17). Modifications of the viral capsids (22) as well as the exploitation of the different tropism of other AAV serotypes (23) offer new possibilities to match AAV to vascular cells.Limitation of Viral VectorsInflammatory response is a major concern in the application of adenoviral vectors. In such a way, the expression of several genes, e.g., c-myc, c-myb, or PCNA is prevented. Therefore, besides solving those problems, it also seems reasonable to look for the other strategies to ameliorate ischemia and to prevent the consequences of myocardial infarction. This potent angiogenic factor has been tested for the stimulation of blood vessel formation in ischemic heart and skeletal muscles. Interestingly, some experiments demonstrated that high and unregulated expression of VEGF may lead to harmful effects. Degradation of HIF-1α is dependent on the action of the oxygen-dependent prolyl hydroxylase, which by adding hydroxyl groups to specific proline residues (P402 and P564) present in so-called oxygen-dependent degradation (ODD) domain, creates the signal for von-Hippel-Lindau (VHL) ligase. The following interesting experimental strategies, applying the so-called vigilant vectors, have been tested (46–49); for reviews of other strategies, see refs. 