6) and found that the AMPAR subunits GluR2 and 3 increased in the synaptosomal fraction (p < 0.02), whereas GluR1 subunits decreased (p < 0.01). To test for a persistent effect on maintenance, we strongly tetanized one synaptic pathway and then applied myr-pep2m 3 hr posttetanization (Fig. Blocking NSF/GluR2-mediated AMPAR trafficking with myr-pep2m reversed persistent potentiation at both the strongly stimulated synapses and the weakly stimulated synapses that underwent synaptic tagging and capture (Supplementary Fig. Blocking the trafficking reversed late-LTP at either strongly tetanized synapses or at weakly tetanized synapses that had undergone synaptic tagging and capture. IPs with (+) and without (−) primary precipitating antisera are shown. Representative immunoblot showing enrichment of GluR1-3 and PSD-95 in synaptosomal fraction, compared with crude hippocampal homogenate.Supplementary Figure 7. Synaptic events were evoked every 15 sec (or every 2.5 sec in Supplementary Fig. Cs was used to block potassium currents, including GABAB responses. Only cells with an initial input resistance of > 100 MΩ, and an initial access resistance of < 20 MΩ with insignificant change (< 20%) during the course of recording were accepted for study. All reagents were from Sigma-Aldrich and all biochemical experiments were at 4°C, unless otherwise stated. The 0.8 M sucrose gradient was collected, added to 3 X its volume of homogenization buffer, and spun at 15,555 X g for 8 min. The blots were developed with 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate/nitro blue tetrazolium and optical density analyzed using NIH Image. Representative images of the bands from these strips are presented in Fig. The relative level of surface GluR2 is expressed as surface/total immunostaining X 100. The relative level of surface GluR2 is expressed as surface/total immunostaining X 100. For IP of PICK1, the hippocampal homogenate was incubated overnight at 4°C with anti-PICK1 antiserum (N-18, 5 μg/200 μl homogenate, Santa Cruz Biotech). 1), it caused only minimal rundown with test stimulation every 15 sec (Fig. 