The first most often created a localized PMMA infiltration with a trend toward a globular pattern, whereas the other most often created a diffuse spread without a trend toward either an acinar or a globular pattern. The next step in our study was to assess whether VCF etiology or vertebral level were associated with PMMA spread class. First, the sample was drawn from a single center and only 2 operators performed a sufficient number of procedures to be compared. First, the sample was drawn from a single center and only 2 operators performed a sufficient number of procedures to be compared. Patient PopulationBKP was recommended for patients with acute VCFs refractory to conservative therapy, who exhibited edema on spinal magnetic resonance images (MAGNETOM Aera; Siemens, Munich, Germany) or active technetium-99m radiotracer (GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, United Kingdom) uptake on single-photon emission computed tomography/computed tomography (Optima NM/CT 640; GE Healthcare) bone scans, and had localized tenderness over the fractured level. Balloon kyphoplasty (BKP) and percutaneous vertebroplasty (PVP) are commonly used procedures performed under fluoroscopic guidance to treat painful VCFs refractory to medical management or bracing, which remain the subject of investigation (3). In theory, a diffuse mixed spread would appear as layers of globular and acinar spread extending across the vertebral body, although this was not observed in our sample.Interrater reliability using the entire system was moderate (κ = 0.47). Variability in how the procedures are performed presents an obstacle to effective analysis of adverse event frequency and pain-reducing efficacy (11). Our classification system required an assessment of the spread pattern within the filled area, as well as an assessment of the degree of PMMA infiltration into the vertebral body. Interrater agreement was considered moderate on the basis of a frequently cited scale (20, 21), which is similar to the agreement found using the current protocols for prostate cancer (22), pancreatic cancer (23), and pulmonary nodule (24). This gives the classification system utility in outcomes’ trials beyond what its moderate interrater reliability suggests because the effect of related classes on outcomes is likely similar and the effect of less-related classes is divergent. We used the newly created classification system to first assess differences in PMMA spread between operators. It is paramount to understand interoperator variability in BKP and PVP, as the largest clinical trials, to date, have been conducted at multiple sites and have not adjusted for potential heterogeneity between operators (4, 5, 25, 26). McDonald et al  showed, in a sample of 2 operators experienced in PVP and 5 novice operators, that several procedural measures and short-term clinical outcomes significantly change as novice operators gain experience (27). 