Unfortunately, most preventive measures among WESW have focused on risk reduction for HIV transmission, ignoring their psychosocial wellbeing and mental health needs (Ampt et al , 2020; Cowan et al , 2018). The additional 4.9% variance in depressive symptoms was statistically significant (p<.05). Therefore, integrating economic strengthening components in the programs targeting WESW is critical to address their mental health wellbeing. Scores are not meant to be interpreted as a diagnosis of depression or another mental health disorder –as this requires further assessment. Second, data were self-reported by WESW and may have been influenced by social desirability biases to minimize or hide depressive symptoms. The research team obtained contact information of key individuals –hereafter site coordinators, at each potential site. All participants who provided consent were then allowed to complete baseline assessments and biomarker testing. 2.3.Ethical ConsiderationsAll study procedures were approved by the Washington University in St. Louis Institutional Review Board (#201811106), Columbia University Institutional Review Board (AAAR9804), and the in-country local IRBs in Uganda: Uganda Virus Research Institute (UVRI) Research Ethics Committee (GC/127/18/10/690) and the Uganda National Council of Science and Technology (UNCST –SS4828). 2.3.Ethical ConsiderationsAll study procedures were approved by the Washington University in St. Louis Institutional Review Board (#201811106), Columbia University Institutional Review Board (AAAR9804), and the in-country local IRBs in Uganda: Uganda Virus Research Institute (UVRI) Research Ethics Committee (GC/127/18/10/690) and the Uganda National Council of Science and Technology (UNCST –SS4828). Informed voluntary written consent was obtained from all study participants prior to participation. Each interviewer received Good Clinical Practice training and obtained the Collaborative Institutional Training Initiative (CITI) Human Subjects Certificate before interacting with study participants. first, we conducted descriptive analyses for all the predictors and outcome variables. Second, hierarchical regression models were conducted to determine the predictors of depressive symptoms and PTSD. 