Their importance for optimal immune function is underscored by the large enrichment of disease-associated polymorphisms within their sequences2. Their importance for optimal immune function is underscored by the large enrichment of disease-associated polymorphisms within their sequences2. It is able to explain how time delays over long timescales could be controlled where a trans-factor model is insufficient. Though not an enhancer, we include it in this review as it represents a paradigmatic example that can inform work in other systems. Together, these studies suggest that S4 acts as a “timing silencer” that generates a time delay in Cd4 silencing in response to withdrawal of TCR signaling. As transcription factors bind DNA rapidly, typically over timescales of seconds117–119, these slow, rate-limiting steps would most likely involve downstream chromatin modification or remodeling events. This view agrees with multiple studies on time courses of inducible pioneer factor binding and chromatin remodeling: upon transcription factor induction, binding sites for these factors became occupied rapidly48,113,120; however, chromatin opening events and activating histone modifications around these binding sites did not appear until hours or even days later. A major finding from genome-wide association studies (GWAS) has been the identification of many disease-associated variants in putative enhancers128,129. Some of the strongest signals come from immune-related diseases, suggesting a significant role for genetic risk in immunopathology. A CaRE4 deletion results in increased polarization towards the Th17 fate under conditions of low IL-2. Switching is initiated by the binding of trans-factors to the enhancer; however, even with full trans-factor induction and binding, switching does not occur rapidly. These elements typically contain multiple modules of transcription factor binding sites that are distributed over an extended genomic region. Using this approach, we found direct evidence for a cis-acting mechanism that generates a long, multi-day delay in the activation of Bcl11b, which encodes a transcription factor essential for T-cell lineage commitment54. 