The dorsal columns of adult female Sprague-Dawley rats were crushed at the level of C8 and a population of injured sensory neurons was traced over a period of two days via dextran-Texas Red labeling of the sciatic nerve. A dorsal column crush lesion was then made by inserting Dumont # 3 jeweler's forceps into the dorsal spinal cord at C8 to a depth of 1.0 mm and squeezing the forceps, holding pressure for ten seconds and repeating two additional times. The muscle layers were sutured with 4-0 nylon suture, and the skin was closed with surgical staples. This movie was made from 100× phase images taken every 30 seconds.Movie S2: Time-lapse movie of dystrophic adult DRG neurons cultured on an inverse aggrecan/laminin gradient. This movie was made from 100× phase images taken every 30 sec.Movie S4: Time-lapse movie of dystrophic adult DRG neurons cultured on an inverse aggrecan/laminin gradient. This movie was made from 100× phase images taken every 30 sec. Components of the glial scar, such as highly sulfated proteoglycans, Ephs, slits, and myelin membrane fragments (Filbin, 2003; Silver and Miller, 2004; Harel and Strittmatter, 2006; Yiu and He, 2006; Busch and Silver, 2007; Xie and Zheng, 2008) as well as the process of neuroinflammation (Donnelly and Popovich, 2008) all contribute to regeneration failure. Clodronate was encapsulated in liposomes as described previously (Van Rooijen and Sanders, 1994). The hole created was sufficiently large enough to allow passage of a 20 ga. needle while small enough to prevent media leakage. Dishes were then rinsed with sterile water and coated with poly-l-lysine (0.1 mg/mL, Sigma) overnight at room temperature, rinsed with sterile water and allowed to dry. The supernatant was removed and the pellet containing bone marrow precursor cells was resuspended and plated in DMEM additionally supplemented with 20% LADMAC cell line-conditioned media (generous gift of Dr. Clifford Harding) to induce differentiation into macrophages. In experiments involving “activated primary macrophages”, cells were stimulated with 2 ng/ml interferon-gamma (generous gift of Dr. Clifford Harding) and 20 ug/ml LPS (Sigma) or interferon-gamma alone for 1 day prior to use in time-lapse to elevate the activation state of the cells. Cortical Astrocyte PreparationCortical astrocytes were harvested from the cortices of P0-P1 rats. 