Specifically, at end-isovolumic contraction, end-systole and end-isovolumic relaxation, we observed increasing angles relative to the annular plane for larger cinching steps. We also quantified minimum and maximum angles throughout the cardiac cycle; in Fig. Consistently, we found significant reductions in the magnitude of maximum and minimum angular velocities with successive annular cinching (Fig. To simplify the observation to only a single time point in the cardiac cycle, refer to Fig. To simplify the observation to only a single time point in the cardiac cycle, refer to Fig. Relative to baseline, annular cinching did not result in significantly altered circumferential strains. Another factor to consider is that anterior tricuspid valve leaflets are mechanically anisotropic, exhibiting stiffer circumferential behavior due to a mostly circumferential collagen orientation.1,20,24,34,40 Therefore, changes in loading from annuloplasty may affect the directional strains of the tissue differently. growth and remodeling, to adapt to this altered environment.2,15,17 In fact, multiple studies have shown that pathological mechanical stimuli in heart valve leaflets, at least in part, increase valvular interstitial cell activation and collagen turnover, which may result in maladaptive leaflet changes.4,8,11,62 Therefore, we must consider that annuloplasty, by altering the mechanobiological equilibrium of the tissue (as shown in here), may elicit a biological response from these actively adapting leaflets.53 Given the sparsity of data on tricuspid valve growth and remodeling, we can only hypothesize how changes induced via annuloplasty may affect the leaflets. Specifically, annular cinching reduced the leaflet’s range of motion, reduced its opening and closing velocity, and reduced systolic strains. We then performed a median sternotomy to expose the heart and prepared the animals for cardiopulmonary bypass. We repeated this cinching process four more times (DeVega2–5), thereby reducing annular size at each stage, see Fig. Temporal AveragingAs heart rates varied between animals we aligned temporal evolutions of all quantities of interest by first dividing them into four distinct segments: end-diastole to end-isovolumic contraction, end-isovolumic contraction to end-systole, end-systole to end-isovolumic relaxation, and end-isovolumic contraction to end-diastole of the next cardiac cycle. 