We, therefore, performed WGS on LUAD samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) cohort that had appeared in previous analyses to lack an RTK/RAS/RAF pathway-activating alteration (Campbell et al , 2016). Variants called by only one of the three callers were filtered out. Variants called by only one of the three callers were filtered out. Variants were annotated for their effect (non-synonymous coding, nonsense, etc.) Variants were annotated for their effect (non-synonymous coding, nonsense, etc.) Same method was used for clinical or molecular features, including smoking history, age of diagnosis, leukocyte fraction, genome doubling, degree of aneuploidy, genetic ancestry, primary disease stage (data available through GDC) using Fisher’s exact test or Wilcoxon’s Rank test. Briefly, SCISSOR is a statistical method for unsupervised screening of a range of structural alterations in RNA-seq data including alternative splicing, intron retention, de novo splice sites, intra-/intergenic deletions, and alternative transcription start/termination. To identify such profile shape changes, it quantifies the level of abnormality of each sample using a projection depth approach (Dang and Serfling, 2010; Donoho and Gasko, 1992) and then uses the statistics from the cohort to detect and rank shape outliers. The focal deletion (379-bp length) in NF1 affected only a single exon that is not well represented in WES or RNA-seq, highlighting the advantage of WGS for the identification of focal SV events (Table S2). We labeled the remaining 57 cases as RPA(–)G LUADs because they lacked an RTK/RAS/RAF pathway alteration identified by WGS (as well as WES and RNA-seq). Recurrent non-coding alterations in RPA(–)G LUADsWe next asked whether the RPA(–)G cases harbored novel SNVs or indels outside the coding genome. Although large-scale genomic studies have shown LUADs to be molecularly heterogeneous, the majority of LUAD cases share the common feature of RTK/RAS/RAF signaling activation through a genetic driver (Desai et al , 2014; Swanton and Govindan, 2016). A key confounder when we try to define RPA(–) LUADs as a distinct entity is the technical limitation of reliably detecting RTK/RAS/RAF pathway genomic lesions in impure tumor samples. Strikingly, 28/85 cases in the present study that were previously found to be negative for any RTK/RAS/RAF lesion by WES and RNA-seq pipelines were subsequently shown by our WGS analysis to harbor a somatic RTK/RAS/RAF driver. If the 57 RPA(–)G cases identified in this study represent a distinct biological entity of RTK/RAS/RAF-independent LUADs, then what pathway drives them to proliferate? 