To assess the neural correlates of motor and non-motor symptoms in PD, numerous functional neuroimaging studies localized and quantified abnormalities within and between different brain regions (cf. The three studies using graph approach performed their analyses on a voxel-wise whole-brain approach and calculated strength, degree, betweenness centrality, clustering coefficient and local efficiency as the measurements of FC, functional integration and segregation. 3.5.Behavioral decodingIn order to assess the functional roles of our seed regions, which represent the consistent evidence for PD-related intrinsic aberrations, we performed behavioral decoding using the BrainMap database. Unlike task-based fMRI it is relatively uninfluenced by compliance or task performance and thus has become increasingly popular to investigate clinical populations including PD. These findings imply, that after an initial break down of efficient processing in the basal ganglia due to a lack of dopamine, the deficit is countered by increased connectivity in other brain regions. A recent ALE meta-analysis examining the functions of the inferior parietal lobe identified four functionally dissociable clusters within this region (Bzdok, Reid, Laird, Fox, Eickhof, 2016). Whereas the overall connectivity throughout the brain increases, connectivity within or between regions, implicated in a certain task (e.g., during a working memory challenge), may decrease. In the first step, the ALE algorithm models the reported foci as center peaks of 3D Gaussian probability distributions, which reflect the spatial uncertainty associated with each focus. 2.4.Task-based FC: meta-analytic connectivity modelingUsing the regions identified in the above ALE meta-analysis as seeds, we then performed meta-analytic co-activation modeling (MACM) in order to delineate brain areas, which are significantly co-activated with these. 2.6.Behavioral decodingIn order to assess the behavioral roles of the seed regions determined in our ALE meta-analysis, we performed behavioral decoding using the BrainMap database. Importantly, there was a substantial contribution from different methodologies, as ALFF studies contributed 18%, ReHo 46.5% and ICA 35.5%. 