HIV has evolved a surprisingly sophisticated mechanism for dormancy in the host cells. Our SPEG method substantially reduces the complexity of sample that allows identification of low abundant but biologically relevant glycosite-containing peptides [38]. These steps were essential and showed the reproducible data generated in this study. This is because, in part, that CTL is compromised in most HIV+ individuals and thus restimulation of broad CTL response is required to clear latent HIV-1 [6]. It is not clear whether the stimulated CTL response is long-lasting and broad-reacting enough to clear all latent reservoirs. The glycosite-containing peptides were subjected to label-free quantitative nano-LC-MS/MS analysis [18, 19]. Lifelong therapy will require a significant amount of financial support for drugs and public health management and providing lifelong therapy to the large infected population may emerge as a challenge [2]. After three washes with 0.1% TBS-Tween 20, the signals were visualized by SuperSignal West Femto maximum sensitivity substrate (Thermo Scientific). After digestion, 5 µL of sample was resolved on a tricine gel and silver staining was used to determine the completion of tryptic digested peptides. Sodium sulphite was added at a final concentration of 60 mM to quench the oxidation reaction. MS analysis was performed using an Orbitrap Velos Pro mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). 2.6 Protein identification and quantificationProteins were identified using SEQUEST in Proteome Discoverer software (Thermo Fisher Scientific, version 1.4). The precursor mass tolerance was set at 20 ppm and the MS/MS tolerance at 0.06 Da. After framing, the Proteome Discoverer result files were imported with a 1% FDR. The integrated intensity (peak area) of glycosite-containing peptides was calculated and normalized by the median of each sample and used to calculate a p-value. Hierarchical clustering was used to cluster the samples and analysis based on normalized intensity of glycosite-containing peptides using QCanvas version 1.2 [29]. 