The lentiviral hTER constructs resulted in WT-hTER and MT-hTer-47A overexpression 20-40 fold higher than the endogenous hTER levels (data not shown). However, that induction was also dependent on the presence of wild-type p53, while the MT-hTer-47A growth effect reported here is not. Alternatively, other DNA damage response pathways may also respond to MT-hTer-47A-induced dysfunctional telomeres. The work presented here suggests that tumors with low-to-absent ATM, which include certain leukemias and a subset of breast cancers, may have a muted response to MT-hTer-47A treatment (45, 46). In experiments involving prolonged cell growth, ATM disruption causes an increase in the number of telomeric fusions detected, which may be due to the accelerated telomere shortening of ATM-deficient cells or to enhanced survival of cells with end-to-end fusions (19, 20). The complexes composed of these proteins, which in mammals have been termed shelterin, prevent the chromosome ends from being treated as DNA breaks and undergoing inappropriate repair processes (2). Cells were split as needed to maintain logarithmic growth. Cells were harvested at indicated time points and stained with Trypan blue. Once a certain critical length is reached, shelterin complexes are no longer effective in preventing the chromosome ends from initiating a DNA damage response, ultimately leading to cellular senescence or apoptosis (4, 5). Immunostaining was performed with rabbit anti-Rap1 (Bethyl Laboratories) and mouse anti-ATM pS1981 (Rockland), followed by the appropriate secondary Alexa Fluor 488 or 568 antibody (Molecular Probes)(11, 15). The enzyme telomerase, which is minimally composed of a protein reverse transcriptase (hTERT) and a template-containing RNA (hTER), counteracts telomere shortening by adding new TTAGGG repeats to the 3′ ends of the chromosomes (1). The enzyme telomerase, which is minimally composed of a protein reverse transcriptase (hTERT) and a template-containing RNA (hTER), counteracts telomere shortening by adding new TTAGGG repeats to the 3′ ends of the chromosomes (1). Images were acquired using the Deltavision SoftWorx 3D capture program. Western blot analysis was performed with the following antibodies: mouse anti-ATM pS1981 (Rockland), mouse anti-ATM (2C1, GeneTex, Inc.), and horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated mouse anti-β actin (Abcam). The following primers were used for qPCR: 5′-TCACGTCATCCAGCAGAGAATGGA-3′ and 5′-CACACGGCAGGCATACTCATCTTT-3′ (β2-microglobulin); 5′-TTGCGGAGGGTGGGCCT-3′ and 5′-CGGGCCAGCAGCTGACATT-3′ (hTER). Automated sequencing was then performed on both strands with the following nested primers: 5′-AGATGAAGCTCCCAGAATGCCAGA-3′ and 5′-ATACGGCCAGGCATTGAAGTCTCA-3′. Telomeric Southern BlottingUM-UC-3 genomic DNA was digested with HinfI and RsaI and run on a 0.6% agarose gel with 5 μg of DNA per lane. For detection of mutant repeats, a 32P-labeled 5′-(CCCAAA)4-3′ probe was used along with a 4-fold excess of unlabeled 5′-(CCCTAA)4-3′ and 5′-(CCCCAA)4-3′ oligonucleotides to block cross-hybridization to wild-type and subtelomeric sequences (9). 