Each subject spoke under three feedback conditions (amplified feedback [AMP], FSF, and DAF), a normal auditory feedback condition (NAF), and two variations in rate (slow/fast), also while hearing NAF. The subject was then instructed about which condition he or she would receive next, so that the alteration (where applicable) would not produce a surprise response that affected his or her speech. The rankings given to each sample were analyzed to see whether there was a significant concordance (agreement) across assessors, using Kendall’s W. The mean ranks for each of the six conditions are given in the top section of Table 3. This, in turn, suggests that rate variation is not the basis of the foreign-sounding nature of the FSF and DAF conditions. Pairwise tests showed no significant differences between the amalgamated fast and slow rate conditions and any of the remaining conditions. In the next analyses, the two rate conditions were dropped because they varied somewhat across speakers. More recent explanations have accounted for the effects of AAF without recourse to feedback monitoring and correction processes. Howell and Sackin (2000) and Howell, Rosen, Hannigan, and Rustin (2000) explained the effects of DAF and frequency-shifted feedback (FSF) as being due to degradation in performance when speaking along with concurrent separate perceptual streams. The nonsignificant differences across NAF and AAF conditions show that there is no evidence that the extent to which fluency is affected under AAF conditions does not depend on the speaker’s native language; otherwise, a significant association would have occurred. Her explanation for the effects of AAF on an acquired language was that the latter needs closer monitoring. Howell et al  (2000) argued that manipulations like DAF alter the situation from one task (speaking in synchrony with production) to two tasks (production in addition to hearing an asynchronous sound). In this way, the extra time allowed because of DAF-slowing allows the linguistic planning done by these separate modules to go on unaffected and be completed in the time required, even with complex words, so the plan and the executed form correspond (Howell et al , 2000). Such subjects were used so that they could make use of this analytical training. Speakers of both languages have their fluency affected by AAF (MacKay, 1970; Rouse & Tucker, 1966). 