Stimuli were presented at the center of the video monitor. The second angle is θ, which is the angular difference between the Global Prediction and the Local Prediction. Participants gave informed consent, and all procedures were in accordance with international standards (Declaration of Helsinki) and National Institutes of Health guidelines. This model also reproduces the contrast-dependent modulation observed by Pack et al  (2005). A key assumption, consistent with the model of Somers et al  (1998), is that lateral inhibition grows faster than lateral excitation as the strength of feedforward input grows. In other words, input strength shifts the balance between directionally-tuned lateral excitation and inhibition, thus determining both the strength and the “sign” (i.e. As a result of this dependency, facilitation and integration yield to suppression and antagonism as the strength of the input increases. We have assumed that the differences in firing rate we have observed are, on average, monotonically related to the strength of the feedforward input provided to both excitatory and inhibitory neurons. Base is the baseline firing rate and was set to 0 and 12 for excitatory and inhibitory neurons, respectively. Accordingly, the cue was centered over either one of the corners (corner stimuli) or one of the sides of the square (contour, dot, short-bar, and long-bar stimuli). Increasing the input strength slightly (40 spikes/s maximum V1 input) yields integrative modulation that is somewhat smaller than that seen for the lowest level of input. Surround modulation matched perceptual interpretation (assayed in humans) under some conditions but not others. Their findings were moreover consistent with previous evidence that area MT underlies the selective perceptual integration/segmentation of moving features (Stoner and Albright, 1992; Thiele and Stoner, 2003; Duncan et al , 2000). Stoner et al , 1990; Duncan et al , 2000; Shiffrar et al , 1995). It may be that our findings (and our model) capture the behavior of area MT only when attention is withdrawn. The role of attention in our findings thus remains unclear.If the perceptions of our monkeys were in fact the same as our human subjects, this would suggest that MT does not underlie the perception of these stimuli. Given previous evidence that macaque monkeys perceptually segment and integrate moving features similarly to humans (Thiele and Stoner, 2003; Zivotofsky et al  2005), we think that possibility unlikely. The output of the video monitor was measured with a PR650 photometer (Photo-Research, Chatsworth, CA). 