NHANES data are publicly released for 2-year survey periods to protect confidentiality and increase statistical reliability. We used the NHANES sample weights to obtain representative estimates for the US civilian, noninstitutionalized population. We did not include a variable on dental insurance coverage as this information was not collected in the NHANES. We used multivariable logistic regression to examine the association between reported unmet oral health care need and UC after controlling for potential confounders, that is, the previously listed secondary explanatory variables. We used the predicted marginals obtained from logistic regression to estimate the risk ratios (RRs) and absolute risk differences between the reference group and the remaining categories for each characteristic. Among adults reporting an unmet oral health care need, prevalence of mild to moderate and severe UC was 32.4% and 18.7%, respectively.Among people with any UC, the mean number of affected teeth was 3.13; among people with mild to moderate and severe UC, the mean number was 1.66 and 6.76, respectively (Table 1). Prevalence of reported unmet oral health care need among adults with mild to moderate and severe UC, 36.6% and 52.2%, respectively, was notably higher than prevalence among adults with no UC, 13.0%. The association between reported unmet oral health care need and UC differed by income—prevalence among low-income adults with no, mild to moderate, and severe UC was 26.8%, 46.9%, and 58.0%, respectively, and among higher-income adults, 7.6%, 25.3%, and 41.4%, respectively. Reasons for reporting unmet oral health care needAmong adults who reported unmet oral health care need, the most frequently cited reasons for being unable to obtain care were financial (Figure)12—inability to afford cost (78%) and no insurance coverage (19%). Model-adjusted unmet oral health care needIn the adjusted model, the variables most strongly associated (highest RR and risk difference and statistically significant at P < .05 in Table 3) with reporting an unmet oral health care need were related to health and financial access.12 For example, the prevalence of reporting an unmet oral health care need increased with UC severity for both income groups. As the question analyzed in our study measured both dental health status and access, our finding that among adults with mild to moderate UC, those with low income (proxy for financial access) more frequently reported not being able to obtain needed oral health care was not surprising. This would also hold for low-income adults, as comprehensive dental services are covered by Medicaid in only 16 states and the District of Columbia.22 In addition, we did not include measures of periodontal disease and other conditions such as partial tooth loss or orthodontic needs, which could result in dental esthetic or functional concerns. 