Antibody gel shift study has shown that the complex of Sp1 and the promoter of DNMT1 contained all 3 transcriptional factors—Sp1, p65, and p50—because the intensity of the complex was significantly decreased when they were incubated with these 3 respective antibodies as shown in Fig. As shown above, both mRNA and protein levels of RASSF1A are upregulated in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells. The HPLC-grade water (>18 mΩ) was obtained from an E-pure water purification system (Barnstead, Dubuque, IA). The HPLC system was equipped with an SCL-10A system controller, a LC-10AD pump, and a SIL-10A auto-sampler (Shimadzu, Columbia, MD).HPLC Chromatographic and Mass Spectrometric Conditions2dC, 5mdC, and the internal standard 5,6-dihydro-5-azacytidine were separated on a 250 × 2.1 mm Hypersil Aquasil C18 5 µm stainless steel column (Thermo Hypersil-Keystone, Bellefonte, PA), which was coupled to a 2-µm Aquasil pre-column (Thermo Hypersil-Keystone, Bellefonte, PA), using the mobile phase consisting of 30% methanol in 10 mM ammonium formate at a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min. Data acquisition was performed using the Analyst (version 1.4).Real-Time RT-PCR AssaysQuantitative RT-PCR was used to quantify the expression of RASSF1A and DNMT1. Electrophoretic mobility-shift assays (EMSA) with nuclear extracts and 32p-labeled oligonucleotides containing the Sp1 motif and DNMT1 promoters’ oligos were performed as previously described (21). The tumor size was then measured by external caliper and the greatest longitudinal diameter (length, L) and the greatest transverse diameter (width, W) were determined. Tumor volume based on caliper measurements were calculated as V = 0.52 * L * W * W. When tumors were grown between 100 to 200 mm3, treatments were initiated. This result suggested that the curcumin-induced increased protein levels of RASSF1A may be associated with the enhanced mRNA level of RASSF1A in MCF-7 cells. Curcumin has been shown to be a potent NF-κB inhibitor; therefore we first check the protein levels of DNMT1 in curcumin-treated MCF-7 cells. 