To address this issue, multiple stakeholders came together to identify innovative methods for collecting YRBSS data at the county level outside of schools. Even when done in schools, these data are mostly collected by sampled classrooms, or school districts, and whole counties are rarely involved, as has been the case with Allegheny County [1]. The mismatch, therefore, may reflect African-American-specific barriers to research participation in general [21] and the fact that we oversampled landline numbers when a greater proportion of African-Americans are likely to live in cellphone-only households [22]. Without oversampling minority groups, subgroup analyses of large data may not be informative [23]. With landlines and cell phone sampling frames, combined response rates were 38.4% and cooperation rates were about 50%. Low response rates indicate possible biases, though we were unable to evaluate for these in the current study. Therefore, we believe that bias resulting from a low response rate has been minimized. A sampling of half the 42 districts in our county would have a similar cost to our county-wide methods. We believe that having county-wide data will allow reluctant school systems to see the benefits of this information and thus invest in school-based data collection. Live interviewers explained the IVR system to the participant prior to switching over from CATI to IVR. Research assistants were experienced with survey methods and trained by authors H.A. Iterative proportional fitting was applied to adjust for nonresponse by adjusting design weights across several dimensions to ensure weighted frequencies matched population totals obtained from Census 2010 SF1 Public Use Microdata Sample and other external sources. Findings will be made available via topic-specific briefs for key stakeholders, including youth-serving agencies, policymakers, and local school boards with the goal of increasing interest and support in conducting school-based YRBSS in the future. While a few have participated in statewide sampling, large districts like Pittsburgh Public School District have not; citing concerns about sensitive questions and time required. With landlines and cell phone sampling frames combined response rates were 38.4% and cooperation rates were about 50%. After switching to IVR,1,554 of the 1,645 who started the IVR portion completed the survey, a loss of 9%. Similarly, of the 1813 who started the survey, 1,645 completed the interviewer portion, also a loss of 9% suggesting that the modes are similar in attrition rates. 