face-name pairs and were consequently included in both subgroup analyses. The results are shown in supplementary Table S1. The results are shown in supplementary Table S1. The results are shown in supplementary Table S1. Previous functional neuroimaging research on memory encoding and episodic retrieval in MCI reported attenuated hippocampal activation in line with findings in AD (Hanseeuw et al  2011; Hampstead et al  2011; Jin et al  2012). The fusiform gyrus is anatomically and functionally adjacent to the hippocampus and has been highlighted during face recognition (McCarthy et al  1996; Lim et al  2011) and colour processing (Wang et al  2013). In addition to the above-mentioned histopathological findings in the hippocampus in AD, the CA1 region has shown decreased metabolic responses (Salehi and Swaab 1999). It is further believed to play an active role in language processing (McCarthy et al  1993; Price 2000; Kurth et al  2010), whilst its function was more recently described as a very basic planning of general orofacial functions independent of actual words (Price 2010). MCI patients showed impaired verbal memory performance (Giovanello et al  2012) and activation likelihood in the afore-mentioned cluster was correlated with the lowest MMSE scores during retrieval of verbal stimuli. Finally, Pariente et al  (2005) directly compared the encoding or recognition phases of AD patients to controls without subtracting any referential conditions before.To guarantee comparability of MCI and AD studies in the respective contrasts (encoding, retrieval), we statistically compared mean age and MMSE scores. Larger sample sizes are believed to provide data closer to the real value, and the belonging Gaussian distribution is thus smaller (Eickhoff et al  2009). noise), ALE scores were compared to an analytically derived null-distribution reflecting a random spatial association between experiments (Eickhoff et al  2012). The Anatomy Toolbox provides maximum probability maps, which represent a summary of different histological maps and allows attribution of each voxel of the reference space to the most likely cytoarchitectonic area (Eickhoff et al  2005). 