Patients underwent continuous stimulation until pacer batteries depleted, for a mean of 3.9 years (46 months); the stimulator was then replaced. Patients underwent continuous stimulation until pacer batteries depleted, for a mean of 3.9 years (46 months); the stimulator was then replaced. These values were analyzed using a paired t test with each patient as his or her own control. These values were analyzed using a paired t test with each patient as his or her own control. The mean amplitude was 0.33 mV (SD±0.39) before initial GES therapy and decreased to 0.31 (SD±0.34) afterward (p = 0.73). In a regression analysis, both the percent change in serosal EGG frequency (Fig. Our patient cases also showed improvement in serosal EGG amplitude after the long-term gastric stimulation (Figs. Our preliminary analysis of gastroparesis symptoms change from time of primary GES placement to time of most recent GES replacement and serosal EGG change in frequency and amplitude has showed no correlation. A number of possible mechanisms of how this neuromodulation is occurring have been discussed. It has been shown that GES therapy is not effective in improvement of gastric dysrhythmia.30,31 What chronic GES therapy is effective at improving or changing in terms of baseline neurophysiology, in particular baseline frequency and amplitude of gastric slow waves, has not been documented. In one study, with a cohort of 41 gastroparesis patients, 36 % had nearly no ICC, while the remainder had adequate amount of ICC. One weakness of our study is the omission of symptom data. One weakness of our study is the omission of symptom data. One weakness of our study is the omission of symptom data. We also know that GES improves gastric motility function, but we do not know how this happens. Data were retrospectively collected on all patients who had a permanent gastric pacemaker in which serosal EGG data of the initial GES device implantation could be found. Mean age at initial GES placement was 44 years (range 8–76); current mean age was 49; the majority of the subjects were female (n = 51, 78 %). Mean age at initial GES placement was 44 years (range 8–76); current mean age was 49; the majority of the subjects were female (n = 51, 78 %). Mean age at initial GES placement was 44 years (range 8–76); current mean age was 49; the majority of the subjects were female (n = 51, 78 %). 