The values used for data processing were the gram force values corresponding to each filament number. To determine if this topographic targeting was a result of the route of neurotrophin application (DRG or spinal cord expression) or the neurotrophin itself, we expressed NGF, artemin, or GDNF within the spinal cord or DRG after dorsal root injury. Visualization was achieved by incubating sections in biotinylated secondary antibody (except for IB4 as it is already biotinylated) followed by vectastain Elite ABC reagents (Vector laboratories, Burlingame, CA), and developed using the peroxidase substrate, 3,3-diaminobenzidine to generate brown color. All quantification of images were performed by a trained student who was unaware of the individual treatments. Consistent with previous observations, gene expression was restricted within the dorsal horn on the injected side of the spinal cord. In contrast to adenoviral injections, lentiviral injections showed little tissue damage or cytotoxicity. Regeneration of myelinated sensory afferents was examined by injecting cholera toxin B (Robertson and Grant, 1985) into the sciatic nerve. The coding regions of alternatively- spliced form of rat GDNF (GDNF555, NCBI reference # S75585.1) and rat GFRα1 (NCBI reference # NM_012959) were kindly supplied by Amgen. Accumulated viral particles from the supernatant were purified by sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation to produce high titer in vivo quality lentivirus. In normal uninjured animals, the majority of cFos expression was localized to the superficial dorsal horn (lamina I&II) (Fig. Virus was resuspended in a Tris buffer containing rat serum albumin and mannitol. Similarly, we also expressed GFRα1, the cognate receptor for GDNF, along with GDNF in the spinal dorsal horn (Fig. With the use of #5 Dumont forceps, triple-crush lesions, 10 seconds each, were inflicted at two sites separated by 3mm along the L4 and L5 afferents at 5–8 mm from the DREZ. These data indicate a topographic targeting of synapses to their normal laminar locations. Here we show, in the presence of artemin, ectopic expression of GFR-α3 within the spinal cord can alter the growth of axons, thus possibly functioning through a similar trans mechanism. Right side L4/L5 crush increased PWL close to the cut off value and raising the ratio to a value closer to 2. Gridwalk testA custom made horizontal ladder with irregularly spaced rungs was used to test for proprioception. Each monofilament was applied in a smooth and steady manner over a two second period until it bends. 