There were no patients with pre-existing pelvic fractures, pelvic fractures diagnosed on pretreatment imaging, or bony metastases. Patient medical records were reviewed for age at cancer diagnosis, ethnicity, body mass index (BMI), menopausal status, and smoking history. Patient medical records were reviewed for age at cancer diagnosis, ethnicity, body mass index (BMI), menopausal status, and smoking history. Patient medical records were reviewed for age at cancer diagnosis, ethnicity, body mass index (BMI), menopausal status, and smoking history. The radiotherapy records were reviewed for the type and duration of radiotherapy. The radiotherapy records were reviewed for the type and duration of radiotherapy. The radiotherapy records were reviewed for the type and duration of radiotherapy. The radiotherapy records were reviewed for the type and duration of radiotherapy. Comparisons of categorical variables between groups were performed using chi-square and Fisher exact tests if necessary. Comparisons of continuous variables between groups were evaluated using the Mann-Whitney U test. The majority of patients (54%) were Caucasian. The median external beam radiation dose was 45.0 grays (Gy) (range, 38.8–68.3 Gy), and was followed by 2 intracavitary implants with low-dose-rate brachytherapy in the majority of patients (n = 241; 93%). A radiation boost to the pelvis after external beam treatment was given in 143 patients (48%). A radiation boost to the pelvis after external beam treatment was given in 143 patients (48%). The median follow-up for all patients was 20.9 months and the median time from the end of treatment to last imaging was 7.4 months. Blomlie et al10 prospectively studied 18 Norwegian women treated with radiotherapy for advanced cervical cancer. They performed pre- and post-treatment MRI studies and detected pelvic insufficiency fractures in 89% of patients. Among 1139 cervix cancer patients, they noted a pelvic fracture rate of 8.2%; for women treated with radiotherapy, compared with 5.9% for those who were not treated with radiotherapy. Although to the best of our knowledge there is currently limited information available regarding the effects of radiotherapy on the bone remodeling processes, radiation has been shown to directly affect osteoblasts, osteoclasts, and osteocytes, resulting in a net reduction in bone matrix production. In the current study, pelvic fractures were associated with lower BMI. In addition, Oh et al16 noted a weight <55 kg to be a significant predisposing factor for pelvic insufficiency fractures among Korean women treated with pelvic radiotherapy. In addition, post-treatment imaging studies were not performed consistently or at specified intervals, likely underestimating the incidence and time to fracture. In addition, post-treatment imaging studies were not performed consistently or at specified intervals, likely underestimating the incidence and time to fracture. In addition, post-treatment imaging studies were not performed consistently or at specified intervals, likely underestimating the incidence and time to fracture. In conclusion, pelvic fractures were detected in approximately 10% of women after definitive radiotherapy for cervical cancer. In addition, to our knowledge, there are few data available regarding pelvic fractures and osteoporosis in premenopausal women undergoing treatment for gynecologic malignancies. The prevention of osteoporosis and pelvic fractures may result in improved survivorship in women undergoing radiotherapy for gynecologic malignancies. 