South africa has one of the highest incidences of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection in Africa. The interaction between antiretroviral drugs and immunosuppressants introduced several challenges. In 2009, the exclusion of HIV-infected persons from the general renal-transplantation program was lifted, enabling HIV-infected patients to receive kidneys from HIV-negative donors or from HIV-positive deceased donors as part of the present study.All HIV-positive patients with stage 5 chronic kidney disease who underwent transplantation with kidneys from HIV-positive donors at our hospital from September 2008 through February 2014 were included in this study; the protocol is available with the full text of this article at NEJM.org. The marked decrease in CD4 T-cell levels during the first year after transplantation was probably related to induction therapy with anti–T-cell antibody; this hypothesis is supported by the fact that all the patients had an increase in the CD4 T-cell count after the first year. In conclusion, our study showed that kidneys from HIV-positive deceased donors can be transplanted into carefully selected HIV-positive recipients, with the expectation that the outcome would be similar to that observed in kidney-transplantation programs involving high-risk patients without HIV infection. DONOR SELECTIONAll HIV-infected deceased donors who were referred to the transplantation unit at Groote Schuur Hospital from September 2008 through February 2014 were included in the study. Valganciclovir, at a dose of 900 mg daily (adjusted according to renal function), was administered for the first 3 months to prevent cytomegalovirus reactivation. Allograft biopsies were performed if there was clinical suspicion of acute rejection (an increased creatinine level, low urine output, or pain over the graft site); in addition, allograft biopsies were performed yearly as part of routine follow-up. The rates of disease progression and death in the population of HIV-positive patients with chronic kidney disease can be modified by ART, which reduces the risk of advanced chronic kidney disease among patients with HIV-associated nephropathy by approximately 60%.2,3 It has been estimated that the prevalence of chronic kidney disease among HIV-infected patients receiving treatment is between 8% and 22%4–7; among untreated patients, it is estimated to be between 20% and 27%.8,9 Confronted with a high burden of HIV disease and limited resources, South Africa faces considerable challenges in providing renal-replacement therapy for the large numbers of HIV-infected persons in whom chronic kidney disease will develop during their lifetime. Data regarding graft survival were censored at the time of a patient’s death (Fig. 