For conference abstracts, we searched for full text articles and additional reported outcomes in MEDLINE, Google Scholar, and the clinicaltrials.gov database. Inclusion and exclusion criteriaWe established a priori study eligibility criteria (Table I). We limited to patients and their caregivers because we were interested in primary accounts of barriers to asthma medication adherence. We limited to qualitative approaches that used open-ended questions to obtain a broader range of barriers to asthma medication adherence. Two team members (SR/DC) independently reviewed the full text of articles, and discrepancies in inclusion/exclusion were resolved by discussion. Little is known about how barriers to asthma medication adherence might differ around the globe based on various countries’ gross national income and provision of universal health care coverage. The reasons for full text exclusion were assessed in hierarchical order. The reasons for full text exclusion were assessed in hierarchical order. We identified 2942 unique titles and abstracts and assessed 838 full text manuscripts for eligibility (Figure 1). The full texts were excluded because 690 did not meet our study approach criteria by not including open-ended questions as part of their qualitative approach or by not using qualitative methods. Thirty-four did not meet the population criteria because they had pediatric or mixed pediatric and adult population without subgroup analysis of adults. Twenty-seven studies were conducted in countries with universal health care and 20 in countries without universal health care. Twenty-seven studies were conducted in countries with universal health care and 20 in countries without universal health care. We sought to describe and characterize trends in patient-reported barriers to asthma medication adherence in countries of varied economic wealth and health care coverage. Study outcomeInternationally, patient-reported barriers to asthma medication adherence are diverse. In this scoping review of 47 studies conducted among 12 nations, we found that study participants reported a wide range of barriers to asthma medications adherence, and that the prevalence of barriers reported appeared to differ according to the presence of universal health care and gross national income. Lack of knowledge and environmental context and resources are commonly cited as barriers to general medication adherence71 and specifically asthma medication adherence.72,73 Indeed, there are interventions targeting these barriers such as asthma self-management programs, motivational interviewing, and services that provide free or low cost access to asthma medications.9,10,74 However, there has been less emphasis on barriers categorized in the other domains of the TDF (eg, social identity, beliefs about consequences) despite their common occurrence in our study. To our knowledge, this is the first international characterization of barriers to asthma medication adherence among qualitative studies in pulmonary disease. Compared with any single behavioral theory, the TDF covers a wider range of potential barriers and enablers and is therefore likely to identify more potential intervention strategies to improve asthma medication adherence. We conducted a scoping literature review to identify adult asthma patient–reported barriers to asthma medication adherence among countries with varied economic wealth and universal health care policies. Though the search yielded a comprehensive identification of barriers in all domains of our behavior theory, the included patient perspectives were collected before widespread use, and research of single maintenance and reliever therapy (SMART) in mild and moderate asthma and may not represent barriers to SMART. Literature search strategyWe designed our search strategy to be inclusive as possible of published and nonpublished investigations. 