Imbalance in autonomic control of the cardiovascular system as measured by heart rate variability is an example of such changes and has been well documented not only in rodents but in humans as well29–31. Increases in vagal tone or HRV have been associated with adverse cardiovascular events in diabetes35, and linked with increased mortality in heart failure patients and the elderly34, 36. Vitamin D deficiency is linked to HRV changes in humans as well38–40 and although the profile differs from rodents the overall conclusion that subtle underlying alterations are occurring in the deficient state holds true. It may be that mice develop a similar HRV decrement if left on the deficient diet for a longer period; our future studies will address this issue. Animals -Three-week old female C57Bl/6 mice (body weight = 9.6 ± 1.6g) were used in this study (Jackson Laboratory – Raleigh, NC). Such effect modification due to nutritional deficiency could have significant relevance to public health and the assessment of toxicological risk. Of those animals, 12 of each diet were randomly chosen and implanted with radiotelemeters at 16 weeks of age. This methodology provided continuous monitoring and collection of physiologic data from individual mice. enhanced pause, tidal volume and minute ventilation) was assessed in awake, unrestrained mice using a whole-body plethysmograph (Buxco, Wilmington, NC). Photochemical Smog Exposures –An atmosphere with high particulate matter (PM) and low ozone and nitrogen oxide concentrations (SA-PM) was generated in the Mobile Reaction Chamber (MRC). Vitamin D exerts its effects through a steroid nuclear receptor 2, 12 that binds to vitamin D response elements (VDRE) on DNA and influences expression of a wide variety of genes affecting the function of numerous organ systems, including the cardiovascular.12–1516 This is of concern because millions of children may be deficient8 and remain so into adulthood thus increasing the likelihood of chronic diseases. 