Fatty acids serve as substrates and mediators of prostaglandin synthesis and steroidogenesis and, therefore, are crucial to reproductive processes.1 Depending on molecular structure, fatty acids are classified as saturated fatty acids (SFAs), monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs), and polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs). The majority of blood specimens collected preconception were nonfasting in our study population (14.5% of women were fasting at the time of blood sample collection). The use of preconception fatty acids determined in plasma phospholipids among women who were attempting pregnancy enabled us to address a potential link between physiologic status of specific fatty acids and both pregnancy and pregnancy outcomes. Plasma measurements are less susceptible to error compared with dietary fatty acid assessment, although direct translation of our results to dietary fatty acids is not possible. Urine human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) testing was performed on daily first-morning urine samples collected on the last 10 days of each woman’s first and second cycles of study participation and on spot urine samples collected at all end-of-cycle visits. Height and weight were measured at baseline to calculate BMI (kg/m2). We used multiple imputation model (PROC MI) with fully conditional specification method to impute missing plasma fatty acids and covariates (e.g., BMI, 1.6%; alcohol, 1.3%; physical activity, 0.1%; income, 0.1%; vitamin use, 1.5%; total cholesterol concentrations, 1.7%) in five imputed data sets, with PROC MIANALYZE to combine the results. The imputed data sets were used during the multivariable analysis.We used log-binomial regression models to examine associations between plasma fatty acids and pregnancy, live birth, and pregnancy loss and estimate relative risks (RR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI). We set the correlation between the unmeasured confounder and plasma fatty acids to vary from ρ = 0 to 0.8, based on previous literature which reported correlations between 0.41 to 0.58.21–23 We additionally investigated the impact of excluding plasma fatty acids with CVs >20% from the composite variables on the overall results. We found that adjustment for unmeasured confounding factors with several different effect estimates with live birth (β from −0.7 to 0.7, corresponding to RRs of 0.5–2.0) and correlations with fatty acids (ρ = 0 to ρ = 0.8) did not produce importantly different results from the models unadjusted for unmeasured confounding factors. Excluding the five plasma fatty acids with CVs >20% from the composite measures of SFA, MUFA, and PUFA did not alter the results for pregnancy, pregnancy loss, and live birth. We found that certain preconception plasma phospholipid fatty acids were associated with live birth among women who had experienced one or two previous pregnancy losses. Therefore, we investigated associations between preconception plasma fatty acid status and pregnancy outcomes, including pregnancy, pregnancy loss, and live birth among women with prior pregnancy loss, a group that may be particularly amenable to potential lifestyle changes to improve their fertility. As plasma phospholipid fatty acid status is not entirely due to dietary intake, it is possible that our observations could have been in part due to confounding by complex metabolic pathways that lead to altered fatty acid metabolism and subsequently affect pregnancy outcomes. 