Antibody gel shift study has shown that the complex of Sp1 and the promoter of DNMT1 contained all 3 transcriptional factors—Sp1, p65, and p50—because the intensity of the complex was significantly decreased when they were incubated with these 3 respective antibodies as shown in Fig. As shown above, both mRNA and protein levels of RASSF1A are upregulated in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells. Notably, the unique combination of methylated CpG islands correlating with breast cancer stage has been proposed to be a diagnostic marker of breast cancer (7). Notably, we have demonstrated the antiproliferation activity of curcumin in 2 breast cancer cell lines:MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells with an IC50 < 10 µM (Fig. This finding that curcumin inhibited DNMT1, thereby reactivating RASSF1A through its promoter hypomethylation, represents a novel molecular mechanism of its anticancer chemopreventive activity for breast cancer. Cell cycle study demonstrated that curcumin at concentrations showing significant hypomethylation activity can induce cell cycles at G2/M phase and significantly decrease S-phase cell population in these 2 breast cancer cells lines (29). Therefore, curcumin may have the advantage over S-phase dependent azanucleoside hypomethylation agents as exerting its hypomethylation activity without entailing the majority of breast cancer cells passing through S-phase, thereby inducing hypomethylation activities on nonreplicating subpopulations of breast cancer cells including stem cell, which are generally nonreplicating and may be particularly difficult populations of cells to be treated with azanucleoside hypomethylation agents. Consistent with its hypomethylation activity, curcumin downregulates mRNA and protein levels of DNMT1, thereby decreasing the methylating activity of nuclear extract, and global DNA methylation in MCF-7 cells. Therefore, in this article, we evaluated whether curcumin can reactivate RASSF1A in an early stage breast cancer MCF-7 cell line and an advanced stage breast cancer MDA-MB-231 cell line. The HPLC-grade water (>18 mΩ) was obtained from an E-pure water purification system (Barnstead, Dubuque, IA). The media was replaced with DMEM supplemented with 5% FBS and 1% P/S antibiotics and the indicated concentrations of curcumin and allowed to incubate for 72 h.Immunoblotting and the Methylation Activity of Nuclear ExtractsFresh cells (106–108 cells) in culture medium or frozen cell pellets, thawed on ice and resuspended in 1 mL ice-cold PBS, were centrifuged (<1,000 g) at 4°C for 5 min and the supernatant was removed and discarded. The HPLC system was equipped with an SCL-10A system controller, a LC-10AD pump, and a SIL-10A auto-sampler (Shimadzu, Columbia, MD).HPLC Chromatographic and Mass Spectrometric Conditions2dC, 5mdC, and the internal standard 5,6-dihydro-5-azacytidine were separated on a 250 × 2.1 mm Hypersil Aquasil C18 5 µm stainless steel column (Thermo Hypersil-Keystone, Bellefonte, PA), which was coupled to a 2-µm Aquasil pre-column (Thermo Hypersil-Keystone, Bellefonte, PA), using the mobile phase consisting of 30% methanol in 10 mM ammonium formate at a flow rate of 0.2 mL/min. Data acquisition was performed using the Analyst (version 1.4).Real-Time RT-PCR AssaysQuantitative RT-PCR was used to quantify the expression of RASSF1A and DNMT1. Electrophoretic mobility-shift assays (EMSA) with nuclear extracts and 32p-labeled oligonucleotides containing the Sp1 motif and DNMT1 promoters’ oligos were performed as previously described (21). The tumor size was then measured by external caliper and the greatest longitudinal diameter (length, L) and the greatest transverse diameter (width, W) were determined. Tumor volume based on caliper measurements were calculated as V = 0.52 * L * W * W. When tumors were grown between 100 to 200 mm3, treatments were initiated. This result suggested that the curcumin-induced increased protein levels of RASSF1A may be associated with the enhanced mRNA level of RASSF1A in MCF-7 cells. To understand the mechanism of the hypomethylating activity of curcumin, the methylation activity of the nuclear extract from MCF-7 cells treated with curcumin or decitabine was determined. Consistent with its hypomethylation activity, the methylation activity of NE from MCF-7 cells treated with curcumin decreased about 70% relative to that of the control (Fig. Recently, we have defined Sp1/NF-κB as a complex binding to the human DNMT1 promoter region to transactivate its expression, which can be inhibited by a proteasomal inhibitor bortezomib (21) and NF-κB inhibitor parthenolide (23). Curcumin has been shown to be a potent NF-κB inhibitor; therefore we first check the protein levels of DNMT1 in curcumin-treated MCF-7 cells. Hence, inhibition of DNMT1 synthesis may be an alternative or complementary mechanism for curcumin’s overall inhibitory effect on DNA methylation of NE. 