Imbalance in autonomic control of the cardiovascular system as measured by heart rate variability is an example of such changes and has been well documented not only in rodents but in humans as well29–31. Increases in vagal tone or HRV have been associated with adverse cardiovascular events in diabetes35, and linked with increased mortality in heart failure patients and the elderly34, 36. Vitamin D deficiency is linked to HRV changes in humans as well38–40 and although the profile differs from rodents the overall conclusion that subtle underlying alterations are occurring in the deficient state holds true. It may be that mice develop a similar HRV decrement if left on the deficient diet for a longer period; our future studies will address this issue. These trends persisted immediately after exposure with HR continuing to decrease over the next 24hrs. These trends persisted immediately after exposure with HR continuing to decrease over the next 24hrs. It is unclear whether this relatively smaller decrease in HR and increase in HRV in the ND mice exposed to SA-PM reflects increased risk47, 48. It is unclear whether this relatively smaller decrease in HR and increase in HRV in the ND mice exposed to SA-PM reflects increased risk47, 48. These responses are similar to what was observed and reported for SA-PM by Hazari et al  in this issue with the difference in effects due to VDD being evident here. Animals -Three-week old female C57Bl/6 mice (body weight = 9.6 ± 1.6g) were used in this study (Jackson Laboratory – Raleigh, NC). However, when compared to pre-exposure, VDD animals had a significantly smaller decrease in breathing frequency after exposure than ND and this effect was even greater when VDD and SA-PM were combined. Although there were no pre-exposure differences in any of the ECG parameters between any of the groups, SA-PM exposure caused a significant increase in PR interval and decrease in QRS complex duration when compared to air; this smog effect was altered by VDD and persisted for 24hrs after exposure only in that group. Such effect modification due to nutritional deficiency could have significant relevance to public health and the assessment of toxicological risk. Of those animals, 12 of each diet were randomly chosen and implanted with radiotelemeters at 16 weeks of age. Briefly, animals were anesthetized using inhaled isoflurane (Butler Animal Health Supply, Dublin OH) and using aseptic technique, each animal was implanted subcutaneously with a radiotelemeter (ETA-F10, Data Sciences International, St Paul, MN) to approximate the lead II of a standard electrocardiogram (ECG). Briefly, animals were anesthetized using inhaled isoflurane (Butler Animal Health Supply, Dublin OH) and using aseptic technique, each animal was implanted subcutaneously with a radiotelemeter (ETA-F10, Data Sciences International, St Paul, MN) to approximate the lead II of a standard electrocardiogram (ECG). Briefly, animals were anesthetized using inhaled isoflurane (Butler Animal Health Supply, Dublin OH) and using aseptic technique, each animal was implanted subcutaneously with a radiotelemeter (ETA-F10, Data Sciences International, St Paul, MN) to approximate the lead II of a standard electrocardiogram (ECG). This methodology provided continuous monitoring and collection of physiologic data from individual mice. Heart Rate Variability Analysis -Heart rate variability (HRV) was calculated as the mean of the differences between sequential RRs for the complete set of ECG waveforms. The ratio of these two frequency domains (LF/HF) provides an estimate of the relative balance between sympathetic (LF) and vagal (HF) activity. enhanced pause, tidal volume and minute ventilation) was assessed in awake, unrestrained mice using a whole-body plethysmograph (Buxco, Wilmington, NC). Photochemical Smog Exposures –An atmosphere with high particulate matter (PM) and low ozone and nitrogen oxide concentrations (SA-PM) was generated in the Mobile Reaction Chamber (MRC). Briefly, SA-PM was artificially generated with 0.491 ppm nitrogen oxide (NO), 0.528 ppm NOx, 29.9 ppmC total hydrocarbons (THC), 24 ppmC gasoline and 5.3 ppmC α -pinene as the initial conditions, which were then irradiated by ultraviolent light. All PM was formed as secondary organic aerosol (SOA) from the photochemical reactions in the MRC. The ten most abundant secondary compounds that were generated in the atmosphere were: ethanol (1.03 ppm), alpha-pinene (0.533 ppm), toluene (0.463 ppm), 2-methylpentane (0.330 ppm), n-hexane (0.222 ppm), isopentane (0.212 ppm), m-& p-xylene (0.201 ppm), 3-methylpentane (0.187 ppm), n-pentane (0.103 ppm) and n-butane (0.0748 ppm) (Figure S2). their HR did not decrease after exposure) (Figure 2A). Vitamin D exerts its effects through a steroid nuclear receptor 2, 12 that binds to vitamin D response elements (VDRE) on DNA and influences expression of a wide variety of genes affecting the function of numerous organ systems, including the cardiovascular.12–1516 Lastly, VDD caused a decrease in QTc when compared with ND with either air or SA-PM exposure during either exposure or immediately after but there were no significant differences among any group for the most part (Table S2). This is of concern because millions of children may be deficient8 and remain so into adulthood thus increasing the likelihood of chronic diseases. 