The area of interest was positioned using as reference the wall of the third ventricle and the base of the brain. The background was obtained from adjacent nuclei that do not express NPY. We considered only the cells that had IOD values at least 3 times higher than that of background located in the adjacencies of the OVLT. We considered only the cells that had IOD values at least 3 times higher than that of background located in the adjacencies of the OVLT. We considered only the cells that had IOD values at least 3 times higher than that of background located in the adjacencies of the OVLT. For the quantification of Kiss1 mRNA we assessed the total IOD of a constant area, the IOD of individual cells and the number of cells located in the AVPV and in the Arc. Available evidence suggests that neither melanocortin nor NPY neurons are the key link between leptin and the reproductive axis (Yeo et al , 1998; Hohmann et al , 2000). Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism software, and an α value of 0.05 was considered in all analyses. During anestrus, animals exhibited vaginal cytology suggestive of diestrus. Animals were perfused approximately 7 weeks after the surgery. Animals were perfused approximately 7 weeks after the surgery. Thus, we assessed the expression of the GnRH mRNA in neurons distributed around the OVLT, where we found a higher number of GnRH neurons expressing Fos. We found no differences in number of Kiss1 neurons, in total Kiss1 mRNA expression and in individual cells Kiss1 expression in the AVPV or in the Arc in any of the experimental groups (Fig.7A-H). Here we show that lesions of the PMV blunt the activation of AVPV and GnRH neurons during the afternoon of proestrus. In agreement, the decreased activation of the AVPV on proestrus displayed by PMV-lesioned animals was correlated to decreased activation of GnRH neurons and, ultimately, to decreased LH secretion and estradiol levels.Previous studies have shown that high levels of estrogen induce an increase in GnRH mRNA (Petersen et al , 1995). For example, estrogen-primed ovariectomized female rats exposed to male odors exhibited an increase in LH secretion (Beltramino and Taleisnik, 1983). However, we observed that the typical decrease in food intake that takes place in the transition from proestrus to estrus (Asarian and Geary, 2006) was altered in PMV-lesioned animals. The characteristic pattern of food intake across the estrous cycle is thought to be the consequence of fluctuations on estradiol levels (Drewett, 1973; Blaustein and Wade, 1976). We propose that the PMV is not directly regulating feeding pattern across estrous cycle, but the decreased levels of estrogen during the proestrus day may be the cause for the results obtained for food consumption. In all parameters assessed, the PMV-lesioned leptin treated rats were not different from the saline injected animals.Because the PMV is reciprocally connected with the Arc (Canteras et al , 1992), we assessed whether PMV lesions affected Arc neurons (NPY and Kiss1) that have been associated to leptin signaling and reproductive control (Gruaz et al , 1993; Smith et al , 2006a; Hill et al , 2008). Interestingly, following 48 hours of fasting, a condition of low leptin levels, ovariectomized and ovariectomized estrogen-primed rats displayed no changes in Kiss1 expression in the Arc (Kalamatianos et al , 2008). Thus, our results show that, in female rats, the increase in LH secretion in response to leptin administration is independent of changes in Kiss1 mRNA.In conclusion, our findings reveal a previously unrecognized role for the PMV in the coordinated control of the neuroendocrine events that occur during the preovulatory LH surge and for leptin's stimulatory effect on LH secretion during fasting. In agreement with others suggesting a dissociation between the brain pathways or signaling cascades mediating multiple leptin actions (Hohmann et al , 2000; Bates et al , 2003), our findings also indicate a segregation between the hypothalamic nuclei recruited by leptin to control reproduction and energy homeostasis. All experiments were carried out in accordance with the guidelines of the National Institute of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (1996) and Institutional Committee for Research and Animal Care of the University of São Paulo. Estrous cycle, body weight and food intakeThe estrous cycle was assessed daily by analysis of the vaginal cytology throughout the experiment. We measured food intake daily for 20 consecutive days (4-5 cycles) at the same time of the day (1:00 pm). All animals were perfused 1 hour (± 10 min maximum) before lights off. All animals were perfused 1 hour (± 10 min maximum) before lights off. After removal of each blood sample (approximately 0.3 mL) an equal volume of heparinized (10UI/mL) saline was injected to restore the blood volume. After removal of each blood sample (approximately 0.3 mL) an equal volume of heparinized (10UI/mL) saline was injected to restore the blood volume. Animals were deeply anesthetized and perfused. Animals were deeply anesthetized and perfused. Our control groups consisted of non-lesioned animals treated with saline or leptin. Our control groups consisted of non-lesioned animals treated with saline or leptin. Perfusion and histologyAnimals were deeply anesthetized with ketamine (5 mg/100 g), xylazine (1 mg/100 g), and acepromazine (0.2 mg/100 g). Leptin administration to leptin-deficient subjects and to ob/ob mice induces gonadotropin secretion and restores fertility (Barash et al , 1996; Chehab et al , 1996; Farooqi et al , 1999; Farooqi et al , 2002). Five series were collected and stored at −20°C. ImmunohistochemistryHypothalamic sections containing the preoptic area and the vascular organ of laminae terminalis (OVLT) were pretreated with hydrogen peroxide, blocked in 3% normal donkey serum, and incubated overnight at room temperature in anti-Fos polyclonal primary antisera raised in rabbit (Ab5, 1:70,000, Oncogene). Sections were incubated for 1 h in biotin-conjugated IgG donkey anti-rabbit (1:1,000, Jackson Laboratories) and for 1 h in avidin-biotin complex (1:500, Vector Labs). Sections were processed as described except that only DAB was used as chromogen.For pSTAT3 detection, immunoperoxidase reaction was performed as described except that sections were additionally pretreated in 0.3% glycine and 0.03% lauryl sulfate before primary incubation. Slides were dipped in NTB2 photographic emulsion (Kodak), dried, and stored at 4°C for 7-10 days. Slides were developed with a D-19 developer (Kodak), dehydrated, cleared in xylene, and coverslipped with DPX.The GnRH cDNA was kindly provided by Dr. Rexford Ahima (University of Pennsylvania, PA, USA), and its specificity was previously described (Bond et al , 1989). The NPY cDNA was kindly provided by Dr. Robert Steiner (University of Washington, WA, USA) and the NPY 35S-labeled riboprobes were generated as described previously (Chan et al , 1996). The Kiss1 probe was derived from PCR fragments amplified with iTaq DNA polymerase (Bio-Rad) from cDNA generated with the SuperScript III First-Strand Synthesis System for Rt-PCR (Invitrogen) from total mouse hypothalamic RNA. 