Aspirin-treated mice that received RT-stored PLTs or PLTs stored in the cold with the addition of NAC to the PAS were able to correct the bleeding time significantly better than those mice that received 7-day cold-stored PLTs with no NAC (Figure 4D) and at close to the levels of mice that did not receive aspirin (Figure 4D). To our knowledge, this study identifies for the first time the role of mitochondrial metabolic dysfunction in which proton-leak– and electron-leak–dependent ROS generation upon >5 to 7 days of cold storage induces PLT oxidative stress. Clustering of GPIbα on the PLT surface was noticed following refrigeration of PLTs.8 The clustered GPIbα may contribute to the recognition of refrigerated PLTs by the lectin domain of the integrin αMβ2 on hepatic macrophages45 and when exposed to long-term cold storage by von Willebrand factor–mediated lectin binding to the Ashwell-Morell receptor of hepatocytes.36 Interestingly, refrigeration-induced GPIbα clustering is thought to induce PLT apoptosis.46 The aggregate problem is also significantly mitigated with partial replacement of plasma for PAS, presumably because of decreased crosslinking between preactivated PLTs and fibrinogen or other plasma proteins.19 When a global ROS reporter was used, cold storage was identified as a process that increases ROS generation,20,22 while there was no increase in the level of superoxide species,49 possibly due to SOD2 expressed by human PLT mitochondria.50 Our study confirms the observation that long-term cold storage results in dysmetabolic mitochondrial activity and ROS production, which may associate with increased inflammatory activation in vivo.51 The fact that human GPIb is recognized by mouse von Willebrand factor54,55 allows the study of bleeding time in immunodeficient mice. Our data suggest that the modified NSG mouse model presented in this report may become a useful tool for studies in which new PAS can be tested preclinically. The use of a paired (controlled) analysis side by side allows a fair comparison with a small number of pools analyzed. This can be prevented by the addition of the antioxidant NAC to a magnesium-containing PAS. In brief, whole blood units from five donors per pool were collected in anticoagulant citrate phosphate double dextrose (Acrodose Plus System; Haemonetics, Braintree, Massachusetts) at RT and processed within 8 hours after collection following the manufacturer's instructions with some modifications. 2.3 ∣In vitro phagocytosisIn vitro phagocytosis was performed as previously described.8 Briefly, monocytic THP-1 cells (ATCC, Manassas, Virginia) were cultured in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California) supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (R&D, Minneapolis, Minnesota), 2 mM glutamine (Life Technologies, Waltham, Massachusetts), 100 IU/mL penicillin and 0.1 mg/mL streptomycin (Life Technologies), and differentiated using 1 ng/mL TGF-β1 (R&D) and 50 nM 1,25-(OH)2-vitamin D3 (Sigma) for 24 hours. Carboxyfluorescein+/CD61-events with light scatter characteristics of macrophages were quantified in relation to the overall amount of the CD61-macrophage population. A P value of <.05 indicates statistically significant difference between the control and test samples. A P value of <.05 indicates statistically significant difference between the control and test samples. However, similar to membrane P-selectin expression, PAC-1 binding to activated GPIIb/IIIa was significantly increased in pooled PLTs subject to cold storage for 10 or 14 days but not to pooled PLTs stored for up to 7 days (Figure 1B). 3-fold) in 7-day pooled, cold-stored PLTs than when stored at RT microparticles per transmission electron microscopy field) while PLTs also displayed the classical hallmarks of cold storage damage including dilation of the open canalicular system, formation of prominent pseudopods, and partial degranulation. These data indicate that cold conditions of storage for 7 days or longer further enhance the generation of ROS in stored PLTs, which can be effectively prevented by an inclusion of the antioxidant NAC in the PAS. 3.4 ∣Cold storage of PRP pooled PLTs for 7 to 14 days results in increased macrophage-dependent phagocytosis partly preventable by NACCold-induced damaged PLT lesions include reorganization of membrane GPs (eg, GPIa, GPIIb/IIIa,9-11 which result in recognition and clearance by internalization (phagocytosis) mediated by macrophage integrins (αMβ2 integrin,35 or hepatocyte Ashwell-Morell receptors.36To determine the status of the macrophage-dependent phagocytosis, we analyzed macrophage-dependent PLT phagocytosis by activated THP-1 cells.9 Length of storage resulted in a modest increase of the macrophage-dependent phagocytosis of 14-day RT-stored PLTs compared with Day 1 stored PLTs (Figure 4A). Mice were sublethally irradiated (2.5 Gy) to induce moderate thrombocytopenia and macrophage depletion through the administration of clodronate liposomes. Mice were sublethally irradiated (2.5 Gy) to induce moderate thrombocytopenia and macrophage depletion through the administration of clodronate liposomes. PLTs that were cold stored for 7 (Figures 4B and S3A) or 14 days (Figures 4C and S3B) were cleared faster and more efficiently by macrophage-depleted NSG mice, with 1% or fewer circulating PLTs by 24 hours after administration (Figure 4B-C). PLTs that were cold stored for 7 (Figures 4B and S3A) or 14 days (Figures 4C and S3B) were cleared faster and more efficiently by macrophage-depleted NSG mice, with 1% or fewer circulating PLTs by 24 hours after administration (Figure 4B-C). 