However, little data are available in fail older patients with multiple comorbid conditions who are at the highest risk of future fracture. Whether findings from previous studies conducted in younger, healthier cohorts translate to an older, sicker population remains to be seen. Trabecular bone score (TBS) is derived from texture analysis of two-dimensional DXA images and is an indirect measure of bone microarchitecture [15–18]. TBS was extracted from the PA spine DXA measurements at baseline, 12 and 24 months using TBS iNsight software (Medimaps Group, Geneva, Switzerland). Non-fasting blood samples were collected at baseline and 6 months for assessment of serum C-terminal crosslinking telopeptide of type I collagen (CTX; Crosslaps, Osteometer Biotech, Herlev, Denmark) as a marker of bone resorption and serum intact procollagen type I N propeptide (PINP; Orion Diagnostica, Espoo, Finland) as a marker of bone formation. Inter- and intra-assay variability was 3.66% and 8.15% for CTX and 4.79% and 4.14% for PINP, respectively.Functional assessments at baseline included the Katz Activities of Daily Living scale [20], Instrumental Activities of Daily Living scale [21], gait speed [22,23], Short Portable Mental Status Questionnaire [24], Comorbidity Index [25], modified Fried Frailty Index (categorized as frail, prefrail or robust) [26] and the Nursing Home Physical Performance Test [27]. We also used the said categorical operational definitions instead of the continuous ones in the mixed models, and obtained between-tertile differences. PatientsThe mean age ± standard deviation of the participants was 86.9 ± 5.1 years. PatientsThe mean age ± standard deviation of the participants was 86.9 ± 5.1 years. The average FRAX score for a hip fracture was 8.8 ± 9.2% and for a major osteoporotic fracture was 21.6 ± 9.9%. Previous studies have examined the relationship of bone turnover markers with bone density following oral bisphosphonates. Our cohort of older women had multiple comorbid conditions and lower gait speed; the results may not translate to men or younger and healthier women. Other larger studies with healthier women have examined short-term changes in bone turnover markers with zoledronic acid and looked at long-term changes in BMD [11]. Future studies are needed to determine if markers are helpful in predicting the long-term outcome following therapy on an individualized basis in the senior community population, and validating any such predictive rules. Future studies are needed to determine if markers are helpful in predicting the long-term outcome following therapy on an individualized basis in the senior community population, and validating any such predictive rules. 