Under both reducing and non-reducing conditions, we obtained similar results for the molecular weights of Ryk. Transfection of cortical neurons with Ryk siRNA prevented increased axon outgrowth in the presence of Wnt5a (Fig. Surprisingly, bath application of Wnt5a increased cortical axon outgrowth but when Wnt5a was applied as a gradient, cortical axons were not only repelled from Wnt5a but simultaneously increased their rates of axon outgrowth. Thus, in both short term (1 hour) and long term (3 day) experiments, Wnt5a-promoted axon outgrowth does not required Fz receptors. Neurons were cultured for 2–3 days after transfection before the turning assays were carried out. Ryk but not Fz receptors are involved in Wnt5a evoked increases in cortical axon outgrowth whereas both Ryk and Fz receptors mediate repulsive cortical axon guidance induced by Wnt5a. In the example shown in Fig. However axon outgrowth involves calcium release through IP3 receptors as well as calcium influx through TRP channels whereas growth cone repulsion is mediated by TRP channels but not IP3 receptors. TRP channels have also been shown to be important for calcium signaling during growth cone guidance and axon outgrowth (Li et al , 2005; Shim et al , 2005; Wang and Poo, 2005). We therefore applied SKF96365 which is a general inhibitor of TRP channels (Wang and Poo, 2005). We therefore applied SKF96365 which is a general inhibitor of TRP channels (Wang and Poo, 2005). This treatment also partially attenuated calcium activity in 4/6 experiments, reducing the frequency of calcium transients from 9.0/hr to 0.8/hr after the addition of SKF96365 (Fig. Thus, as has been shown for other guidance cues such as netrin-1 and BDNF (Gomez and Zheng, 2006), calcium signaling is required for both of these Wnt induced behaviors. These results suggest that the calcium signaling mechanisms underlying axon outgrowth are similar during short term (1 hour) and long term (3 day) exposure to Wnt5a. Experimental reagentsThe following reagents were used: culture media and electrophoresis reagents (Invitrogen), bovine serum albumin (BSA, Sigma), recombinant protein Wnt5a (R&D systems), secreted Frizzled-related protein (sFRP-2, R&D systems), Anti-mouse Frizzled-2 anitbody (R&D systems), Rabbit-anti-Ryk function blocking antibody (a gift from Dr. Yimin Zou, UCSD), Mouse-anti-βIII tubulin antibody (Millipore), ECL plus (GE Healthcare), 2-aminoethoxydiphenyl borate (2-APB, Calbiochem), SKF-96365 (Alexis Biochemicals), BAPTA-AM (Invitrogen), U-37122 (Sigma), m-3M3FBS (Calbiochem), Autocamitide-2 related inhibitory pepetide II (AIPII, Calbiochem), KN62 (Calbiochem), 1-Oleoyl-2-acetyl-sn-glycerol (OAG, Sigma-Aldrich), IgG (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) Experimental reagentsThe following reagents were used: culture media and electrophoresis reagents (Invitrogen), bovine serum albumin (BSA, Sigma), recombinant protein Wnt5a (R&D systems), secreted Frizzled-related protein (sFRP-2, R&D systems), Anti-mouse Frizzled-2 anitbody (R&D systems), Rabbit-anti-Ryk function blocking antibody (a gift from Dr. Yimin Zou, UCSD), Mouse-anti-βIII tubulin antibody (Millipore), ECL plus (GE Healthcare), 2-aminoethoxydiphenyl borate (2-APB, Calbiochem), SKF-96365 (Alexis Biochemicals), BAPTA-AM (Invitrogen), U-37122 (Sigma), m-3M3FBS (Calbiochem), Autocamitide-2 related inhibitory pepetide II (AIPII, Calbiochem), KN62 (Calbiochem), 1-Oleoyl-2-acetyl-sn-glycerol (OAG, Sigma-Aldrich), IgG (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) To investigate the role of components downstream of calcium signaling, we applied 2 inhibitors to CaMKII which has been shown to be important in axon outgrowth (Tang and Kalil, 2005). To investigate the role of components downstream of calcium signaling, we applied 2 inhibitors to CaMKII which has been shown to be important in axon outgrowth (Tang and Kalil, 2005). To investigate the role of components downstream of calcium signaling, we applied 2 inhibitors to CaMKII which has been shown to be important in axon outgrowth (Tang and Kalil, 2005). To investigate the role of components downstream of calcium signaling, we applied 2 inhibitors to CaMKII which has been shown to be important in axon outgrowth (Tang and Kalil, 2005). Second, we show that activation of Ryk receptors is required to promote increased outgrowth of cortical axons by Wnt5a but that both Ryk and Fz receptors are necessary for Wnt5a induced cortical axon repulsion. Second, we show that activation of Ryk receptors is required to promote increased outgrowth of cortical axons by Wnt5a but that both Ryk and Fz receptors are necessary for Wnt5a induced cortical axon repulsion. In this study we found that in response to Wnt5a axon outgrowth is dependent on activation of Ryk receptors whereas growth cone repulsion requires both Ryk and Fz. Ryk, in response to Wnt5a, mediates repulsion of cortical axons (Liu et al , 2005; Keeble et al , 2006) which is consistent with our findings. In someexperiments, etched coverslips (Bellco) were used to locate neurons. The non-canonical Wnt/calcium pathway is mediated by Fz receptors and has been shown to play a role in regulation of cell movement during gastrulation (Veeman et al , 2003a; Veeman et al , 2003b). The non-canonical Wnt/calcium pathway is mediated by Fz receptors and has been shown to play a role in regulation of cell movement during gastrulation (Veeman et al , 2003a; Veeman et al , 2003b). Previous studies have shown that IP3 receptors are involved in axon outgrowth (Takei et al , 1998; Jacques-Fricke et al , 2006). Moreover, pharmacologically inhibiting PLC which is known to act upstream of IP3, eliminates the growth promoting effects of Wnt5a whereas a PLC agonist mimicked the effects of Wnt5a, confirming that 2-APB blocks the IP3 pathway. One possibility is that promotion of cortical axon outgrowth occurs through calcium influx via a TRP channel other than TRPC5. Measurements of axon outgrowth and statistical analysisMeasurements of axon outgrowth and branching after bath application of reagents for 3 days were carried out on phase images of fixed neurons, which were acquired with a 20× 0.5NA Plan Fluor objective mounted on a Nikon TE300 Quantum inverted microscope equipped with a Princeton Instruments MicroMax 512 BFT cooled CCD camera or a Photometrics Cascade II: 512. Only neurons with pyramidal morphologies and with a process more than 100μm were chosen for anaylsis. Only neurons with pyramidal morphologies and with a process more than 100μm were chosen for anaylsis. Only neurons with pyramidal morphologies and with a process more than 100μm were chosen for anaylsis. Wnt proteins are highly conserved secreted morphogens that play important roles during embryogenesis (Ciani and Salinas, 2005). 5A) of calcium transients induced in an axon and its growth cone by bath applied Wnt5a (“Wnt”). 5A) of calcium transients induced in an axon and its growth cone by bath applied Wnt5a (“Wnt”). The pseudocolored calibration bar indicates ratiometric intensity ranging from 100% of baseline calcium activity (black) to 175% (white). Scale bars in all figures=50μm. Only processes longer than 20μm were included as branches. Data were saved in Excel 2000(Microsoft) and GraphPad Prism (GraphPad) was used to perform statistical analysis and create graphs. In experiments comparing 2 treatments and in turning assays the Mann-Whitney test was used for statistical analysis. Phase images of live cells were acquired with the Nikon microscope at 1 min intervals to record growth cone behaviors. Blots blocked with 3% milk (Lab Scientific) and 3% BSA were incubated with rabbit anti-mouse Ryk antibody (1:500) and goat anti-rabbit-HRP (1:10000, Jackson ImmunoResearch) to stain Ryk receptors. Antibodies were then stripped by re-blot plus mild solution (Millipore) and reprobed with mouse anti-βIII tubulin antibody (1:500) and goat anti-mouse-HRP (1:10000, Jackson ImmunoResearch) to stain the loading control, βIII tubulin. Over 60% of neurons cultured for 2 days expressed GFP while co-transfection efficiency was around 90%. Over 60% of neurons cultured for 2 days expressed GFP while co-transfection efficiency was around 90%. Over 60% of neurons cultured for 2 days expressed GFP while co-transfection efficiency was around 90%. Over 60% of neurons cultured for 2 days expressed GFP while co-transfection efficiency was around 90%. Over 60% of neurons cultured for 2 days expressed GFP while co-transfection efficiency was around 90%. Over 60% of neurons cultured for 2 days expressed GFP while co-transfection efficiency was around 90%. To minimize the effects of any morphological changes that could affect fluorescence measurements through changes in volume, the baseline (F0) was calculated as a shifting average of the fluorescence intensity over a 5-min window. Fluorescence images of Calcein Red/Orange were acquired immediately after each frame of Fluo-4 fluorescence. Ratiometric measurements (R) were obtained by dividing the Fluo-4 fluorescence value by the fluorescence value of Calcein Red/Orange. Calcium signals (R/R0) were then measured as the percentage change from a shifting average baseline (R0) of the ratiometric measurements as described above for nonratiometric measurements. When we examined axon outgrowth after shorter exposures to Wnt5a we found that within 1 hour the rate of axon outgrowth was 4 times that of control axons (1.7 vs 7.7μm/hr) (Fig. The establishment of gradients with these techniques was confirmed with fluorescent dyes (data not shown). 