Upon prospective culture directly from human lung without an organoid intermediate, FACS-isolated EPCAM+ITGA6+ITGB4+TNFRSF12Ahi cells (TNFRSF12Ahi Basal 1 cells; Extended Data Fig. 9f), suggesting that this system could be used for scalable therapeutics discovery. 9f), suggesting that this system could be used for scalable therapeutics discovery. 4a, Extended Data Fig. We have applied long-term human distal lung organoid cultures to progenitor discovery and modelling of infectious disease. Our organoids also enable facile exploration of SARS-CoV-2 distal lung infection, which is relevant to COVID-19-associated pneumonia27, and implicate SCGB1A1+ club cells as a target whose infection could compromise protective lung glycosaminoglycans and precipitate a vicious infection cycle. SCGB1A1-negative populations were also infected and are under further investigation; for example, bronchial transient secretory cells express ACE2 and TMPRSS236. SCGB1A1-negative populations were also infected and are under further investigation; for example, bronchial transient secretory cells express ACE2 and TMPRSS236. Any methods, additional references, Nature Research reporting summaries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, acknowledgements, peer review information; details of author contributions and competing interests; and statements of data and code availability are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-3014-1. Standard informed consent for research was obtained in writing from all patients who contributed to this study before tissue procurement and all experiments followed relevant guidelines and regulations. In addition, five long-term organoid cultures (2–6 months) underwent targeted next generation sequencing to exclude pathogenic nucleotide variants (see below). Single-cell RNA-seq of unfractionated organoid culturesLung organoid cultures from separate individuals were dissociated 4 weeks after primary plating and subjected to droplet-based scRNA-seq with the 10× Genomics Single Cell 3′ platform with a 5-nucleotide UMI, according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Principal component analysis, t-SNE, unsupervised graph-based clustering, statistical testing, and the pseudotime trajectory for all scRNA-seq analyses are described in Supplementary Methods and Supplementary Data 1. These were dissociated and subjected to droplet-based scRNA-seq with the 10× Genomics Chromium Single Cell 3′ platform v2 according to the manufacturer’s protocol. These were dissociated and subjected to droplet-based scRNA-seq with the 10× Genomics Chromium Single Cell 3′ platform v2 according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Subsequent analysis is described in Supplementary Methods and Supplementary Data 1. Histology and immunocytochemistryOrganoids were fixed with 2% paraformaldehyde at 4 °C overnight, paraffin embedded and sectioned (10–20 μm) as previously described37. Antibodies used for immunocytochemistry staining following standard staining protocols39 are listed in Supplementary Methods and images were acquired on a Leica-SP8 confocal microscope. Whole mounts were then washed with PBS-T and incubated with fluorescent secondary antibodies, phalloidin and DAPI, for 4 h at room temperature in staining buffer. 3D rendering of confocal image stacks was performed using Volocity Image Analysis software (Quorum Technologies Inc., Guelph, Ontario). 4h, which required five colours, cilia were distinguished by staining with two fluorescent secondary antibodies and merging the colocalized voxels into a pseudocoloured channel using Volocity software. Variant call files are provided in Supplementary Data 2. Qualitatively identical results could also be obtained with anti-HTII-280 (AT2 marker, Terrace Biotech) FACS purification in lieu of LysoTracker. The same approach was employed for purified AT2 and basal cultures after respective isolation strategies from an initial FACS-purified, EPCAM+, stroma-depleted organoid starter culture. The same approach was employed for purified AT2 and basal cultures after respective isolation strategies from an initial FACS-purified, EPCAM+, stroma-depleted organoid starter culture. The same approach was employed for purified AT2 and basal cultures after respective isolation strategies from an initial FACS-purified, EPCAM+, stroma-depleted organoid starter culture. The same approach was employed for purified AT2 and basal cultures after respective isolation strategies from an initial FACS-purified, EPCAM+, stroma-depleted organoid starter culture. The same approach was employed for purified AT2 and basal cultures after respective isolation strategies from an initial FACS-purified, EPCAM+, stroma-depleted organoid starter culture. The same approach was employed for purified AT2 and basal cultures after respective isolation strategies from an initial FACS-purified, EPCAM+, stroma-depleted organoid starter culture. Organoids were centrifuged at 200g for 3 min at 4 °C and the supernatant was removed. SARS-CoV2 infection of human distal lung organoidsVeroE6 cells were obtained from ATCC as mycoplasma-free stocks and maintained in supplemented DMEM with 10% FBS. SARS-CoV2 infection of human distal lung organoidsVeroE6 cells were obtained from ATCC as mycoplasma-free stocks and maintained in supplemented DMEM with 10% FBS. SARS-CoV2 infection of human distal lung organoidsVeroE6 cells were obtained from ATCC as mycoplasma-free stocks and maintained in supplemented DMEM with 10% FBS. All SARS-CoV-2 work was performed in a class II biosafety cabinet under BSL3 conditions at Stanford University. All SARS-CoV-2 work was performed in a class II biosafety cabinet under BSL3 conditions at Stanford University. All RNA samples were treated with DNase (Turbo DNA-free kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Brilliant II SYBR Green QRT–PCR 1-Step Master Mix (VWR) was used to convert RNA into cDNA and to amplify specific RNA regions on the CFX96 Touch real-time PCR detection system (Bio-Rad). The Brilliant II SYBR Green QRT–PCR 1-Step Master Mix (VWR) was used to convert RNA into cDNA and to amplify specific RNA regions on the CFX96 Touch real-time PCR detection system (Bio-Rad). The identities of the stem cells that regenerate distal lung epithelium in vivo over the human lifespan have been inferred from mouse studies, despite differences between these species1. The identities of the stem cells that regenerate distal lung epithelium in vivo over the human lifespan have been inferred from mouse studies, despite differences between these species1. The identities of the stem cells that regenerate distal lung epithelium in vivo over the human lifespan have been inferred from mouse studies, despite differences between these species1. Live-imaging and confocal microscopy of immobilized apical-out lung organoidsLive organoids were held between two coverslips in a viewing chamber (Lab-Tek II two-chambered coverglass) and filmed using a Nikon TE2000E microscope using differential interference contrast (DIC) microscopy with a 63× objective. Statistics and reproducibilityUnless stated otherwise, all data are representative of at least two independent experiments with each independent experiment carried out using an organoid culture derived from one individual. Box plot bounds span first through third quartiles, horizontal lines represent median values, and whiskers represent data range minima or maxima or, in the case of outliers, 1.5 times the interquartile range with outliers represented by data points. Code availabilityScripts to perform analyses of scRNA-seq data are provided with this paper. b, Brightfield microscopy evaluation of required exogenous growth factors and automated organoid quantitation after day 10 of chemically defined organoid culture with specified recombinant growth factors, N = Noggin, E = EGF, W = WNT3A, R = RSPO1, n = 4 per condition, data are mean ± s.e.m., * = P < 0.05, two-tailed student’s t-test, scale bar = 500 μm. Bottom right, proliferation of EPCAM+ cells purified from distal lung cultures after day 10 of organoid culture with specified growth factors, N = Noggin, E = EGF, W = WNT3A, R = RSPO1, n = 3 per condition, data are mean ± s.e.m., ** = P < 0.01, two-tailed student’s t-test. g, Quantitation of red, green, or chimaeric, distal lung organoid cultures from two individuals (1, 2) after initial and serial passaging (P1 = passage 1). g, Quantitation of red, green, or chimaeric, distal lung organoid cultures from two individuals (1, 2) after initial and serial passaging (P1 = passage 1). g, Quantitation of red, green, or chimaeric, distal lung organoid cultures from two individuals (1, 2) after initial and serial passaging (P1 = passage 1). g, Quantitation of red, green, or chimaeric, distal lung organoid cultures from two individuals (1, 2) after initial and serial passaging (P1 = passage 1). Top right, isolation of purified AT2 organoids. 1e–g, passage 1 after lentiviral infection, scale bar = 200 μm. Note apical microvilli (black arrows) and lamellar bodies (red arrows); scale bar = 10 μm. b, Intracellular FACS measurement of KRT5 protein expression in Basal 1 and 2 fractions from a. c, Representative brightfield of day 14 organoid cultures from a, b. d, Quantitation of 3 independent experiments from a–c, box plot represents first quartile, median, third quartile, and whiskers represent minimum and maximum. The nucleoside analogue FdC demonstrated dose dependent activity with IC50 of 340 nM as compared to neuraminidase inhibitor zanamivir, which only impairs viral shedding but not infectivity and replication. Single-cell RNA-seq of mixed distal lung organoids or purified alveolar organoids revealed uniformly high expression of canonical AT2 cell markers in alveolar populations (Fig. In all panels nuclei are stained blue with DAPI, and actin microfilament organization visualized with phalloidin (green). 1q, Supplementary Data 1, Supplementary Table 3). supp methods and refs 6a, Supplementary Data 1). Basal 1, but not Basal 2, expressed canonical lung basal cell mRNAs such as TP6317, integrin-α6 (ITGA6) and integrin-β4 (ITGB4, which encodes a binding partner of ITGA618 and marks mouse lineage-negative epithelial progenitors (LNEPs))7 (Fig. Basal 1, but not Basal 2, expressed canonical lung basal cell mRNAs such as TP6317, integrin-α6 (ITGA6) and integrin-β4 (ITGB4, which encodes a binding partner of ITGA618 and marks mouse lineage-negative epithelial progenitors (LNEPs))7 (Fig. Characterization of TNFRSF12A+ progenitors Characterization of TNFRSF12A+ progenitors To determine whether this enrichment reflected intrinsic proliferative potential, we fractionated total distal lung organoids by FACS into EPCAM+ITGA6+ITGB4+ Basal 1 cells and then into TNFRSF12Ahi and TNFRSF12Aneg subsets (Fig. Characterization of TNFRSF12A+ cells in distal lung Characterization of TNFRSF12A+ cells in distal lung Characterization of TNFRSF12A+ cells in distal lung Characterization of TNFRSF12A+ cells in distal lung Characterization of TNFRSF12A+ cells in distal lung Characterization of TNFRSF12A+ cells in distal lung Characterization of TNFRSF12A+ cells in distal lung Characterization of TNFRSF12A+ cells in distal lung Immunostaining of human distal lung tissue showed TNFRSF12A+ basal cells that were enriched intermittently at the tips or bases of bronchiolar furrows (Fig. 