A lumbar drain or ventriculostomy may be needed in people with persistently increased ICP despite daily LPs; a permanent ventricular shunt may be needed in the rare patient who develops chronic hydrocephalus. PML is a multifocal process, so multiple symptoms are common and can include hemiparesis, aphasia, ataxia, visual deficits, and cognitive impairment (CASE 7-2). Rare reports exist of spinal cord involvement, but cranial nerves and the peripheral nervous system are typically spared. Supratentorial lesions are most common, but the basal ganglia, brainstem, and cerebellum can be involved. In vitro evidence has led to anecdotal reports of successful outcomes with off-label use of several medications, including mirtazapine and interleukin-7, but these agents have not been systematically studied in clinical trials.78,79 Topotecan showed a trend toward improved radiographic outcomes and increased survival in a phase 2 trial80,81; however, no phase 3 trial has been performed. Because of its predilection for the basal ganglia, movement disorders are not uncommon. LP is often contraindicated because of the mass effect, and the CSF profile is nonspecific. Serum Toxoplasma IgG is usually positive but can be falsely negative, while the CSF PCR has a low sensitivity but is helpful if it is positive. In general, empiric treatment is initiated in patients with AIDS found to have ring-enhancing lesions. If none are seen, brain biopsy should be considered to evaluate for primary CNS lymphoma.PRIMARY CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM LYMPHOMA.The clinical and radiographic presentation of primary CNS lymphoma is similar to that of CNS toxoplasmosis. CSF studies show a mildly elevated protein and mild lymphocytic pleocytosis. A positive Epstein-Barr virus PCR is highly suggestive but not diagnostic of primary CNS lymphoma, and cytology is helpful when abnormal but does not exclude the diagnosis if normal. A positive CSF varicella-zoster virus PCR or IgM antibody confirms the diagnosis. Alternatively, the recovering immune system can mount a marked response to persistent antigens remaining after a previously treated opportunistic infection, resulting in recurrence or progression of symptoms, a scenario known as paradoxical IRIS. Initiation of ART at higher CD4+ T-cell counts may result in a dramatically reduced incidence of IRIS.87 Furthermore, in patients with coinfections, delaying initiation of ART until several weeks after treatment of the coinfection has begun can reduce rates of IRIS and improve survival, likely by reducing the total antigen burden in the brain before reconstituting the immune system. In people with significant clinical deterioration and evidence of cerebral edema, high-dose corticosteroids are indicated. In addition, these toxicities may not completely resolve with discontinuation of these agents, so a complete ART history is important, as many people who are HIV infected encountered in clinical practice today were exposed to one or more of these agents in the past. This may be due to the effects of chronic systemic inflammation that occurs despite optimal virologic suppression, long-term ART toxicity, lifestyle factors, or a combination of these factors.91 Neurologists should be aware of this phenomenon as neurologic diseases of older age may occur a decade or more earlier in people with long-standing HIV infection. Furthermore, we are only beginning to understand the long-term health consequences of chronic HIV infection, leading to higher rates of several neurologic disorders, including stroke, dementia, and peripheral neuropathy, which are also occurring at younger ages in people who are HIV infected. Finally, several current areas of research, including strategies to prevent the chronic inflammation associated with HIV infection and strategies to cure HIV, may directly impact the incidence of neurologic complications of HIV. With a large population of individuals who are HIV infected in the United States and worldwide who are aging, neurologists should be aware of these conditions and comfortable with their diagnosis and management. Because most ART-experienced individuals with HAND exhibit stable levels of impairment, any significant changes in cognition should be reevaluated for other causes, such as new-onset thyroid dysfunction or subclinical cerebrovascular disease, especially in older people.Currently no specific treatments for HAND exist, but they are urgently needed because even mild stages of HAND are associated with reduced quality of life and lower rates of ART adherence.38 A 2017 24-week randomized controlled trial in 45 people with HAND found paroxetine improved a summary neurocognitive performance measure.39 A trial of intranasal insulin is also ongoing after several studies revealed that insulin resistance, insulinlike growth factor, and soluble insulin receptor levels correlated with HAND.40,41 Cell culture data demonstrating a neuroprotective effect of insulin treatment provide further hope that it may have utility in HAND.42 Finally, maraviroc, a chemokine receptor CCR5 antagonist used to treat HIV infection, has shown neuroprotective effects in primate models of HIV,43 and its addition to standard ART regimens has been associated with improved neurocognitive performance in small pilot studies.44,45 A larger study of maraviroc intensification is ongoing. These complications can affect any part of the neuraxis and stem primarily from four mechanisms: (1) direct effects of HIV (eg, neurocognitive impairment), (2) immunocompromise secondary to uncontrolled HIV infection (eg, opportunistic infections), (3) aberrant immune responses in the setting of ART initiation (eg, immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome [IRIS]), and (4) adverse effects of ART (eg, peripheral neuropathy). Common signs include reduced distal pinprick, temperature, or vibratory sensation with reduced or absent ankle reflexes. Common signs include reduced distal pinprick, temperature, or vibratory sensation with reduced or absent ankle reflexes. Common signs include reduced distal pinprick, temperature, or vibratory sensation with reduced or absent ankle reflexes. Scrambler therapy, a noninvasive US Food and Drug Administration (FDA)–approved peripheral neuromodulator with demonstrated efficacy in treating chemotherapy-associated neuropathy, has also been anecdotally reported to have benefit.56 Other Direct Neurologic Complications of Human Immunodeficiency VirusThis section discusses less common direct neurologic complications of HIV infection.ASEPTIC MENINGITIS.During acute HIV infection, individuals can develop a nonspecific headache and neck stiffness with or without fever that is often accompanied by systemic symptoms of acute HIV infection, such as arthralgia, myalgia, fatigue, and lymphadenopathy. Lumbar puncture (LP) usually reveals a lymphocytic pleocytosis and elevated protein but negative bacterial culture and viral polymerase chain reactions (PCRs). Therefore, it is important that neurologists are familiar with the differential diagnosis and treatment of neurologic complications of HIV when confronted with either the ART-experienced patient with well-controlled HIV infection or the patient with newly diagnosed HIV infection with significant immunocompromise who is ART naïve. Examination reveals spastic paraparesis and vibratory and proprioceptive deficits more than pain and temperature abnormalities. Examination reveals spastic paraparesis and vibratory and proprioceptive deficits more than pain and temperature abnormalities. Examination reveals spastic paraparesis and vibratory and proprioceptive deficits more than pain and temperature abnormalities. The thoracic cord is the most common area of involvement. The thoracic cord is the most common area of involvement. Etiologies are varied and include direct toxicity of HIV infection, an aberrant immune response resulting in an inflammatory myopathy mimicking polymyositis or inclusion body myositis,60 ART toxicity (especially with zidovudine), vasculitis, and infection. In the United States, incidence has declined tenfold over the past 2 decades.62 Still, cryptococcal meningitis remains a significant worldwide problem. It often initially presents as a slowly progressive nonspecific headache with or without fever. Recommended antimicrobial therapy consists of induction with IV amphotericin B (0.7 mg/kg/d to 1.0 mg/kg/d) and oral flucytosine (25 mg/kg every 6 hours) for 2 weeks or until the CSF is sterile, whichever is later. 