IF showed that Twist2 was barely detectable in the vector transfectants (Fig. To confirm that Twist2 is responsible for p12-induced EMT, siRNA was used to knockdown Twist2 expression in p12 transfectants. Transient transfection with synthetic double-stranded siRNA was used because we failed to establish stable Twist-2 siRNA transfectants. The average distance of vector and p12 transfectants that migrated from the wounded edge was 100 ± 90 and 550 ± 150 μm, respectively, in 24 h (Fig. Numerous metastatic lesions were formed from intravenously injected vector transfectants after 4 weeks in all animals (n=6) (Fig. However, E-cadherin re-expressed MET cells failed to establish lung metastasis when they were directly injected into the tail vein of athymic mice (Fig. We therefore examined the protein levels of desmoplakin, N-cadherin as well as Twist-2 in E-cadherin re-expressed cells. Subcutaneous injection of a mixture of EMT and non-EMT cells results in the formation of lung metastasisSince p12-induced EMT cells have enhanced invasive properties (Fig. Since we have shown in Figure 4D that only EMT cells were able to intravasate, a conceivable interpretation of these results would be that EMT cells invaded into the surrounding tissues and intravasated so that the obstacles were cleared for non-EMT cells to migrate and to enter the circulation.Visible lung metastases formed in 3 of the 6 animals (Fig. Direct fluorescent detection of DsRed and GFP showed that all the metastatic tumors emitted red but not green fluorescence (Fig. Direct fluorescent detection of DsRed and GFP showed that all the metastatic tumors emitted red but not green fluorescence (Fig. Direct fluorescent detection of DsRed and GFP showed that all the metastatic tumors emitted red but not green fluorescence (Fig. Direct fluorescent detection of DsRed and GFP showed that all the metastatic tumors emitted red but not green fluorescence (Fig. 6D, top panels) indicating that they were derived from DsRed-positive cells. 6D, bottom right), consistent with them being non-EMT cells. 6D, bottom right), consistent with them being non-EMT cells. However, both DsRed and GFP DNA were detected in the blood stream of all the animals in both groups. However, both DsRed and GFP DNA were detected in the blood stream of all the animals in both groups. Numerous experimental data support the notion that EMT occurs and plays an important role in tumor progression and metastasis (1). For individual EMT cells to complete the entire metastasis process including detaching from primary site, degradation of the surrounding matrix, migration and invasion through the basement membrane, intravasation and survival in the circulation, extravasation, attach and proliferation at the secondary site, the cells would need an incredible plasticity to accomplish these complex tasks. To test this hypothesis, we took the advantage of the unique properties of p12 in regulating SSC growth and studied the effect of p12 overexpression on EMT of HCPC-1 cells and on their progression and metastasis. 5), suggesting that either there are uncharacterized factors in our experimental system that are important or MET is not an integral part for metastasis. For example, Snail, a known E-cadherin repressor and an EMT inducer (45), was found to attenuate cell proliferation by inducing cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 (WAF/CIP1) (46). Under this circumstance, both EMT and non-EMT cells, represented by GFP and DsRed expression, respectively, were detectable in blood stream but only non-EMT cells were detected in the lung metastases (Fig. p12 antisense expression was induced by 25 μM ZnSO4 for 24 h. To induce EMT of the vector and antisense transfectants of HaCaT cells, a mixture of TGF-β (10 ng/ml) and EGF (30 ng/ml) was added and the cells were incubated in the presence of Zn2+ (25 μM) for 48 h (20). qRT-PCR assay of E-cadherinThe hamster E-cadherin primer set was designed based on the hamster E-cadherin cDNA sequence. RT-PCR analysis of E-cadherin repressorsThe mRNA levels of E-cadherin repressors including E12/E47, Snail, Slug, Twist1, Twist2, ZEB-1, and ZEB-2 were analyzed by RT-PCR with the primer sets shown bellow. DsRed, first primer set: F, 5′-CTTCGCCTGGGACATCCTG-3′; R, 5′-TGGGTCACGGTCGCCACGCC-3′. #610404), a goat anti-vimentin pAb (Santa Cruz, #sc-7939), and a mouse anti-human Twist2 mAb (abcam, #ab57997) at RT for 1 h. After washing with PBS, Alexa 488-labeled goat anti-rabbit IgG, Alexa 555-labeled donkey anti-goat IgG, and Alexa 555-labeled goat anti-mouse IgG were used to visualize E-cadherin, vimentin, and Twist2, respectively. 1, the morphology of the pMTCB6+-HaCaT vector control transfectants changed from epithelial to fibroblastic (Fig. Western blotting shows that the p12 protein level in the vector control transfectants was induced by TGF-β and EGF and was decreased in the antisense transfectants both in the absence and presence of TGF-β and EGF (Fig. These results indicate that p12 is required for TGF-β-induced morphology change and E-Cadherin expression, two prominent markers of EMT. These results indicate that p12 is required for TGF-β-induced morphology change and E-Cadherin expression, two prominent markers of EMT. These results indicate that p12 is required for TGF-β-induced morphology change and E-Cadherin expression, two prominent markers of EMT. The polygonal vector transfectants were surrounded by the p12 transfectants as shown by red (Fig. These transcription repressors are often modulated by one of the classic signaling pathways including the WNT, TGF-β, Hedgehog, Notch, and receptor tyrosine kinase that are often disregulated in cancer and have been shown to stimulate EMT (11). The loss of E-cadherin expression, and the gain of vimentin expression in p12 transfectants were confirmed by Western blotting analysis (Fig. 