In the present study we have confirmed that atorvastatin, a representative of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors, exerts dual effect on angiogenic activity of endothelial cells, being stimulatory at low, nanomolar concentrations and inhibitory at higher, i.e., micromolar doses. Current hypotheses on the mechanisms of development of cancer, atherosclerosis, or Alzheimer disease point to the crucial role of the formation of new blood vessels in those conditions. Although the consequence of atherosclerosis is very often insufficient blood supply and the resulting heart and peripheral muscle ischemia, the development of the atherosclerotic plaque is undoubtedly dependent on the formation of blood vessels. Besides removal of pro-oxidant heme, the products of HO-1 activity have been recently demonstrated to be involved in numerous protective processes. Thus, the effect of statins may be cell-type dependent, but further studies are necessary for better understanding of those interactions. Importantly, plasma concentrations of statins in patients treated with HMG-CoA reductase inhibitors are in the picomolar and nanomolar ranges (Desager and Horsmans 1996), although some other studies reported higher concentrations (Wong et al  2002). However, studies demonstrated also the stimulation of VEGF synthesis at high-micromolar concentrations of the drugs (Frick et al  2003). ReagentsM199 medium, l-glutamine, epithelial growth factor (EGF), hydrocortisone, and carboxymethylcellulose were purchased from Sigma. Primers for reverse transcriptase–polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) of eNOS, heme oxygenase (HO)-1 and EF2 genes have been designed using the sequences deposited in GeneBank and synthesized at Institute of Biochemistry and Biophysics in Warsaw, Poland. They constitute the pleiotropic effects, which have been demonstrated to influence the production of inflammatory cytokines and other mediators, such as reactive oxygen species (for a recent review see Wassmann and Nickening 2003; Liao and Laufs 2004). DMSO was added at the same amount to control the effect of diluent. After a 48-h incubation period, BrdU (10 μM) was added for 2 h and proliferation was measured by BrdU incorporation assay according to the vendor's protocol. Capillary SproutingExperiments were performed as previously described (Jozkowicz et al  2003, 2004) according to the procedure established by Korff and Augustin (1998) using medium containing 10% FCS, but without ECGS. In order to generate HUVEC spheroids, 750 cells were suspended in culture medium containing 0.25% (w/v) carboxymethylcellulose. RT-PCRTotal RNA was isolated from the cells by acid guanidinum thiocyanate-phenol-chloroform extraction. RT-PCRTotal RNA was isolated from the cells by acid guanidinum thiocyanate-phenol-chloroform extraction. Synthesis of cDNA was performed on 2 μg of total RNA with oligo-dT primers for 1 h at 37°C using MMLV reverse transcriptase, according to vendor's instruction. Then PCR with Taq polymerase was performed on cDNA for 22 to 35 cycles using the following protocol: 95°C 40 s, 58°C 40 s and 72°C 50 s. The primers recognizing VEGF (5′-CAC CGC CTT GGC TTG TCA CAT and 5′-CTG CTC TCT TGG GTG CAC TG), eNOS (5′-GTG ATG GCG AAG CGA GTG AA and 5′-CCG AGC CCG AAC ACA CAG AA), HO-1 (5′-CTT TCA GAA GGG TCA GGT GTC C-3′ and 5′-GTG GAG ACG CTT TAC GTA GTG C-3′), and EF2 (5′-GCG GTC AGC ACA ATG GCA TA and 5′-GAC ATC ACC AAG GGT GTG CAG) as a reporter gene have been used. Each GEArray membrane consists of 23 cDNA fragments from genes associated with angiogenesis as well as positive Glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase (GAPDH) and negative (pUC18 DNA) controls printed in two-spot configuration on specialized nylon membranes. After washing, the chemiluminescent detection was done and the arrays were exposed to x-ray film. ELISA AssaysELISA for IL-8 and eNOS were from R&D Systems and were performed according to vendor's protocol. Alkaline phosphatase–conjugated streptavidin (Dak, Denmark) at the dilution 1:5000 in TBS was used and the visualization was performed using the 5-bromo-4-chloro-3-indolyl phosphate/p-nitroblue tetrazolic chloride (BCIP/NBT)Blue liquid substrate for membranes. Statistical evaluation was done with analysis of variance (ANOVA) followed by a posteriori Tukey test. Proangiogenic Effect of Atorvastatin at Nanomolar Concentration Is Not Dependent on Cell ProliferationRecently we have observed that atorvastatin at nanomolar concentration was proangiogenic (Frick et al  2003). No significant toxicity of atorvastatin on HUVECs was observed at tested concentrations (not shown). No significant toxicity of atorvastatin on HUVECs was observed at tested concentrations (not shown). The level of expression of VEGF-D in HUVECs is, probably, very low as changes in the expression of VEGF-D mRNA could be detected only after 38 rounds of PCR amplification (Figure 5C). Moreover, ELISA for VEGF-D did not demonstrate any VEGF-D protein in conditioned media harvested from HUVEC cultures (not shown). 