Experiment 1 replicated the mirror-induced bias that Holmes et al (2004) had previously reported, and extended their findings to show that manipulating the position of the reflected hand (and thus the apparent initial visual location of the reaching hand) influenced reaching movements only when the mirror was present. We suggest that the sensorimotor feedback loop involving the production of movement commands (i.e., ‘tap the fingers of both hands’), and the registration of the sensory consequences of those commands (i.e., ‘feeling and seeing the fingers of both hands tapping’) is tightly coupled to the multisensory representation of the location of the hand itself. Typically, proprioceptive information is more reliable under active as compared to passive conditions (Chokron et al  2004; van Beers et al  2002; Welch et al  1979), and one might expect perceived arm position to be less affected by discrepant visual information in the former case. With the present results, it is not possible to determine the absolute weightings of visual and proprioceptive information in the specification of the felt initial position of the hand, since measurements of perceived hand position were not explicitly taken. Only an indirect measure of the initial hand position – the terminal reaching error – was recorded, and this is subject to error corrections or other dynamic trajectory modifications that occur during the reaching movement itself (Rossetti et al  1995). The relative weighting given to one source of information over another may also depend upon instructional, attentional, and/or other cognitive task demands (Canon 1970, 1971; Kelso et al  1975; Pick et al  1969; Shimojo 1987). There are two ways in which this re-weighting of visual and proprioceptive information could come about: Either the visual information becomes more reliable over time, or the proprioceptive information becomes less reliable over time. However, the reliability of proprioceptive information is known to degrade over time, with proprioceptive ‘drift’ occurring over very short timescales: The felt location of a hand held passively out of sight begins to drift after about 8-15s, and brief visual exposure to the hand may then ‘reset’ the felt location of the hand to the visually-specified location (Brown et al  2003; Wann & Ibrahim, 1992). The present study raises an interesting issue concerning the integration of visual and proprioceptive information based not only on the precision of that information, but also on the type or quality of that information. One limitation of several such studies of the relative weighting of visual and proprioceptive information is that the available visual information is, often necessarily, impoverished. In several previous studies of the specification of hand position prior to reaching movements, the visual marker for hand position consisted only of a small light or marker on a display screen in an otherwise dark room (e.g., Lateiner & Sainburg 2003; Rossetti et al  1995; van Beers et al  1998, 1999a, van Beers et al  b, 2002; Welch 1972; though see Desmurget et al  1997). To this end, we have manipulated the felt location of the hand by using a mirror oriented in the midsagittal plane, and examined the effects of shifts in the felt position of the hand on subsequent reaching movements made with that hand (Holmes et al  2004). Since the visual information concerning hand position was in fact unreliable, in one sense the optimal weighting of visual and proprioceptive information in terms of minimising reaching errors would have been to disregard visual information completely. Conversely, if the terminal error depends upon the integration of visual and proprioceptive information, then different mirror-hand positions will induce reaching errors in different directions, depending on the direction and magnitude of the conflicting visual and proprioceptive information. Participants gave their informed consent prior to taking part in the experiments. The participant’s left index finger was placed either 12 or 19cm to the left of the mirror and 30cm in front of their body. One recent theoretical approach to the integration of vision and proprioception in perceiving the position of the hands has examined the relative ‘weighting’ of the two sources of sensory information under a variety of conditions (e.g., van Beers et al  1999b). It is now clear that positional information tends to be integrated in a statistically optimal fashion, weighting the inputs from different modalities in accordance with their relative precision (i.e., in inverse proportion to their variance, Ernst & Banks 2002; Ernst & Bülthoff 2004; van Beers et al  1998, 1999b, 2002). No specific fixation point was provided, but small marks on the covering provided a number of consistent reference points, and the experimenter monitored their gaze direction throughout the experiment. In the Mirror Passive and No-Mirror Passive conditions, participants were instructed to gaze at their left index finger in the mirror or at an equivalent location on the cardboard, respectively. In all conditions, participants were instructed by the experimenter to “reach” after 4, 8, or 12s of exposure to the experimental condition, according to a randomised sequence. Recent studies have shown that visual information is more reliable than proprioceptive information in the azimuthal plane, while proprioceptive information is more reliable than visual information in the radial depth plane, centred on the shoulder of the relevant arm (Haggard et al  2000; van Beers et al  1998). When the visually- and proprioceptively-specified positions of the right hand coincided (i.e., when both hands were positioned at either 12 or 19cm either side of the mirror), reaching errors were close to zero and similar to those made in the No-Mirror conditions. Experiment 2The results from Experiment 2 are presented in Figure 3 and Table 2. 