In contrast to the previous report, we also detected Smo protein at the base of tail follicles (Figure 4c, 4d). However, we found 676 genes with significant differential correlation with Smoothened in these tissues (P < 0.05, Bonferroni correction, see Methods). Rps7 binds directly to Mdm2, inhibiting its ability to degrade p53 (Zhu et al , 2009). Rps7 binds directly to Mdm2, inhibiting its ability to degrade p53 (Zhu et al , 2009). Rps7 binds directly to Mdm2, inhibiting its ability to degrade p53 (Zhu et al , 2009). Rps7 binds directly to Mdm2, inhibiting its ability to degrade p53 (Zhu et al , 2009). Pten is an antagonist of the PI3-kinase signaling pathway which is frequently inactivated in epithelial tumors (Salmena et al , 2008). This relationship is supported by the observation that across the whole genome, Pten was the third-most-frequently “rewired” genes in papillomas carrying Hras mutations. Randomized inheritance of polymorphic variants between the strongly divergent Mus musculus and Mus spretus (Dejager et al , 2009) produced high variance in gene expression between normal individuals. Differential cancer susceptibility in dorsal and tail skinThere is considerable debate over the cellular origins of skin BCCs, with some studies favoring the interfollicular epidermis (Wong and Reiter, 2011; Youssef et al , 2010) the hair follicle bulge region (Wang et al, Cancer Cell), or both locations (Grachtchouk et al , 2011). Indeed, while Ptch1 mRNA levels are similar in dorsal and tail skins, Ptch2 is expressed at a significantly higher level in the tails (data not shown), suggesting that compensation may explain the relative lack of tail BCCs when Ptch1 is deleted in this tissue. We also present CARMEN, a user-friendly software package for network analysis. Methods such as correlation analysis that identify relationships between genes in the same compartment or across compartments in intact tissues are a useful tool to understand the interactions that underlie normal tissue homeostasis, responses to damage, and development of progressive diseases including neoplasia. Mice were housed in standard conditions, fed ad libitum, and sacrificed at 8 weeks of age. Mice were housed in standard conditions, fed ad libitum, and sacrificed at 8 weeks of age. Animals were housed and treated in accordance with the regulations and protocols stipulated by the UCSF Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC). Animals were housed and treated in accordance with the regulations and protocols stipulated by the UCSF Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC). Animals were housed and treated in accordance with the regulations and protocols stipulated by the UCSF Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC). Mice were sacrificed at 0, 2, 4, 6, 24, 48, and 72 hours, and after one week. Residual genomic DNA was removed by DNase treatment (Ambion). Residual genomic DNA was removed by DNase treatment (Ambion). Raw FVBBX microarray data are available for download at GEO (accession GSE52650). Statistical methodsSpearman rank correlation 5% genome-wide significance was established by permutation (Churchill and Doerge, 1994). CARMEN software and documentation are available at http://davidquigley.com/carmen.html with source code available at https://github.com/DavidQuigley/QuantitativeGenetics. CARMEN is written in C++ using the wxWidgets and Boost libraries (http://wxwidgets.org, http://boost.org). CARMEN is written in C++ using the wxWidgets and Boost libraries (http://wxwidgets.org, http://boost.org). CARMEN is written in C++ using the wxWidgets and Boost libraries (http://wxwidgets.org, http://boost.org). eQTL LOD plots were generated with R/QTL (Broman et al , 2003). eQTL LOD plots were generated with R/QTL (Broman et al , 2003). eQTL LOD plots were generated with R/QTL (Broman et al , 2003). eQTL LOD plots were generated with R/QTL (Broman et al , 2003). eQTL LOD plots were generated with R/QTL (Broman et al , 2003). After another PBS wash slides were mounted using Citifluor. After another PBS wash slides were mounted using Citifluor. After another PBS wash slides were mounted using Citifluor. After another PBS wash slides were mounted using Citifluor. After another PBS wash slides were mounted using Citifluor. For immunofluorescence, slides were de-pariffinized with citrisolve. In the first two months after a mouse is born, its dorsal hair follicles progress synchronously through this cycle in a temporally predictable manner (Muller-Rover et al , 2001). All tail samples expressed hair-follicle-specific keratins at levels above background, consistent with follicles in tail being primarily in the anagen phase (Figure 1a, d).Expression of mitotic markers such as Aurora kinase A (Aurka) was significantly higher in tail than in dorsal telogen or anagen skin (Figure 1d), consistent with elevated proliferation rates. To test this idea, we performed an expression Quantitative Trait Locus (eQTL) study in the 89 FVBBX mice where we had both dorsal skin and tail skin from the same animal. Gene expression data were corrected for strain-specific SNP effects on microarray hybridization (Methods). Using matched tissues reduced non-genetic variation and provided equivalent statistical power in both conditions. One example was Rps26, a ribosomal protein mutated in Diamond-Blackfan Anemia, which can affect TP53 transactivation (Cui et al , 2014; Doherty et al , 2010). Rps26 was expressed at nearly identical levels in tail and dorsal skin but was under much stronger genetic control in tail skin (LODtail 21.8 vs. LODdorsal 6.4, Figure 1f–h). Keratinocytes, the most common cell type in skin, produce several closely related families of proteins with distinctive locations and functions (Fuchs, 1995; Schneider et al , 2009). Conserved and tissue-specific networks in dorsal and tail skinsSignals from the Wnt and hedgehog pathways organize the hair placode during mouse embryonic development, and Wnt activation from the dermal papillae is required for follicle down-growth and cycling (Chiang et al , 1999; Gat et al , 1998; Huelsken et al , 2001; Kishimoto et al , 2000; St-Jacques et al , 1998). Expression of the Wnt-associated transcription factor Lef1 (DasGupta and Fuchs, 1999) was modestly higher in tail skin and dorsal anagen skin than in dorsal telogen, but expression levels of the Hedgehog pathway genes Smo and Gli1 were nearly identical between these tissues (Figure 1d). We then calculated pair-wise differential correlation genome-wide and ranked each gene by the number of significant differential correlations between the two tissue conditions. The Dsk2 mutation at Krt2, a model for epidermolysis bullosa, results in hyperkeratosis in mouse footpads, ears, and tails but not dorsal skin (Fitch et al , 2003; Rentrop et al , 1987). Skin morphology, function, and tumor susceptibility vary in different parts of the body (Rinn et al , 2008). Expression of type II keratin Krt1 and type I keratin Krt10, while strongly correlated in dorsal skin, showed no mRNA relationship in tail skin. To withstand physical stress, the soles of human feet, mouse paws, and mouse tails have thicker and tougher epidermal layers than dorsal skin. TPA treatment has been observed to induce differentiation of basal keratinocytes (Reiners and Slaga, 1983). TPA treatment has been observed to induce differentiation of basal keratinocytes (Reiners and Slaga, 1983). TPA treatment has been observed to induce differentiation of basal keratinocytes (Reiners and Slaga, 1983). Expression of the proliferation-associated keratins Krt6a, Krt6b, Krt16, and Krt17 increased significantly after TPA treatment, and these genes were linked to the “Skin Barrier and Cornified Envelope” module. Early differentiation markers (involucrin) increased to a peak at two hours, followed by markers of the primitive epithelium (Krt8), which increase to peak at six hours and revert to homeostatic levels by 12 hours. Markers of the cornified envelope (Sprr1b) and keratin wound response (Krt6a) increase to a peak at 12 hours and are still significantly elevated 48 hours after treatment. 