Low use of the ED is also supported by data from Brousseau that reported individuals with SCD had an average of 2.59 encounters (hospitalization or ED visit treat and release) per year. [6] This data represented over eight states and 20,000 individuals with SCD. [23] In another quality improvement study of three ED’s, delays were between one to two hours, however a third site experienced significantly longer delays of up to four hours. [23] In another quality improvement study of three ED’s, delays were between one to two hours, however a third site experienced significantly longer delays of up to four hours. [24] Overcrowding also contributes to longer delays to analgesia and remains a challenge to the administration of timely analgesics. [32] While challenging, ED’s can form a multidisciplinary team to determine other “spaces” that can be used to initiate treatment in the ED. This supports prior work in which patients report feeling a high degree of stigma and being treated as a drug addict by healthcare providers. [32] There is no data to support a high incidence of addiction among individuals with SCD. In addition to being unable to make appointments, the lack of transportation to appointments has been previously identified as a barrier to follow-up. [13] Differences in the time to receive pain medications have been found to vary by patient characteristics such as age, race and gender and organizational characteristics such as ED volume and arrival time. Case managers can help facilitate these needs as well. In NC, a partnership between EDs and the state Case Management System was formed. Over 3.5 years, over 900 referrals were made and a large shift from inactive to active case management was achieved. We believe are findings under-report barriers and over-report satisfaction because NC has a strong organized system of sickle cell care with six centers throughout the state. Additionally the majority of study participants were affiliated with the primary study site, utilizing services in an ED that has incorporated multiple SCD patient focused strategies. Several of these strategies have been in place for several years, yet patients continue to report dissatisfaction with long wait times for analgesics and provider knowledge gaps. Using a multi-method approach of survey and interviews, provided a robust understanding of persistent barriers to care and to identify opportunities to improve VOE care in the ED. In order to improve SCD care provision, the NHLBI funded eight centers across the US to participate in the Sickle Cell Disease Implementation Consortium (SCDIC, U01HL133964). The study took place in a large comprehensive Sickle Cell center in North Carolina (NC). The study site serves over 500 adults and approximately 150 adolescents with SCD. The study site serves over 500 adults and approximately 150 adolescents with SCD. [25] There were 27 questions from the Adult Sickle Cell Quality of Life Measurement Information System (ASCQ-Me) quality of care module included. [25] There were 27 questions from the Adult Sickle Cell Quality of Life Measurement Information System (ASCQ-Me) quality of care module included. [25] There were 27 questions from the Adult Sickle Cell Quality of Life Measurement Information System (ASCQ-Me) quality of care module included. [26–28] ASCQ-Me is composed of three composites: 1) access to care, 2) quality of provider communication and 3) quality of care in the ED. Each interview lasted approximately 60 minutes, was digitally recorded and transcribed verbatim. Each interview lasted approximately 60 minutes, was digitally recorded and transcribed verbatim. We utilized a semi-structured guide developed by members of the SCDIC needs assessment committee. A codebook was developed based on emerging themes from the transcripts and a priori codes adapted from literature on SCD. The remainder of the transcripts were coded using the final agreed upon coding structure. Treatment DelaysDelays in treatment initiation and assessment were a prominent concern in the interviews. This stigma often caused disbelief of the level of pain the participants reported and led to inadequate pain control.I have had visits in the hospital you know with the stigma that to me seems a little, a little racist, you know, because of the fact that they you know like a white nurse or something, somebody who’s not that familiar with the disease, they’ll see me coming in and like at 3:30 in the morning and like you kind of disheveled and or either you know, not even disheveled just coming in and say you’re in pain and you want medicine and they’ll treat you kinda funnyI have had experiences in the past where because of the fact that like I said to you earlier, the stigma thaťs placed on sickle cell patients of being drug addicts and drug seekers because you know the kind of pain we have and the strong medicines we have to take, you know, yeah some people have gotten addicted but the stigma placed on it we’re just drug addicts. 