Variation between studies could also be due to circadian or behaviorally-associated changes in hemolymph composition. Variation between studies could also be due to circadian or behaviorally-associated changes in hemolymph composition. Variation between studies could also be due to circadian or behaviorally-associated changes in hemolymph composition. Variation between studies could also be due to circadian or behaviorally-associated changes in hemolymph composition. For example: long-term dialysis of unanesthetized freely-moving crayfish shows dramatic (twofold) changes in hemolymph glutamate associated with the onset of nighttime (Cebada et al  2006), and our own preliminary observations (S.C. Piyankarage et al , unpublished) suggest that glutamate levels in Drosophila larval hemolymph also change two to threefold depending on behavioral state. The data above demonstrate that extracellular glutamate functionally eliminates glutamate receptors within a few minutes. This glutamate-dependent loss of immunoreactivity is desensitization-dependent (Augustin et al  2007), consistent with the idea that constitutive desensitization leads to redistribution or degradation of postsynaptic glutamate receptors. B-type glutamate receptors are tetramers composed of GluRIIB, GluRIIC, GluRIID, and GluRIIE (Chen et al  2005; Featherstone et al  2005; Qin et al  2005). As a first step in answering this question, we used immunoblots to determine whether extracellular glutamate causes degradation of glutamate receptor protein. 4, GluRIIA and GluRIIB protein from larvae were detectable on immunoblots. Our immunoblot technique was sensitive enough to detect a one-half reduction in GluRIIA or GluRIIB protein, since loading reduced amounts of protein showed easily measurable concomitant reductions in GluRIIA and GluRIIB (Fig. Hemolymph measurements in Drosophila EAAT mutants have not been performed, so it is unclear how much Drosophila EAAT activity regulates hemolymph glutamate. To determine whether the glutamate-dependent loss of postsynaptic receptors involves glutamate binding directly to the lost receptors, we examined glutamate-dependent receptor loss in larvae carrying GluRIIA[E783A] mutations that block glutamate-binding in a subset of neuromuscular receptors. In this way, live imaging (Schmid et al  2008) and our immunohistochemical studies (Augustin et al  2007) are reconciled. Drosophila larvae with mutations in one of these xCT proteins, called ‘genderblind’ based on a mutant courtship phenotype, have one-half normal hemolymph glutamate (Augustin et al  2007; Piyankarage et al  2008). D. melanogaster NMJ glutamate receptors have a relatively high EC50 for activation—about 2 mM (Heckmann et al  1996)—but the EC50 for glutamate receptor desensitization can be substantially lower (Featherstone and Shippy 2008). Indeed, glia that might serve this purpose have been observed in Drosophila larvae (Banerjee et al  2006; Augustin et al  2007). Indeed, recent work in D. melanogaster suggests that extracellular glutamate might serve an important modulatory role (Augustin et al  2007; Grosjean et al  2008). Except where noted, all data were obtained from wild-type strain ‘Oregon R’ or (where appropriate) the physiologically equivalent control strain w[1118]. In GluRIIA[E783A]; df(2L)cl[h4]/GluRIIA[AD9] mutant animals, all GluRIIA proteins are engineered such that there is an alanine in place of glutamic acid at position 783. To record excitatory junction currents (EJCs), segmental nerves to the voltage-clamped muscle were stimulated at 0.5 Hz by a Grass S48 stimulator via a suction electrode filled with bath saline (0 mM glutamate). Time constants were calculated from exponential fits to the falling phase of individual currents, using PClamp 10. Time constants were calculated from exponential fits to the falling phase of individual currents, using PClamp 10. We then moved the same outline for measurement to a nearby region on the same muscle and measured fluorescence in the same way for the same channel. Note that the antibody used for visualization of GluRIIB in situ (Fig. Mouse monoclonal anti-GluRIIA (8B4D2) antibodies were obtained from University of Iowa Developmental Studies Hybridoma bank and used at 1/100. FITC, TRITC, and Cy5-cojugated goat anti-mouse or anti-rabbit secondary antibodies were obtained from Jackson Immunoresearch Laboratories (West Grove, PA, USA) and used at 1/400. These EJCs were over 200 nA in amplitude and lasted less than 50 ms (Fig. In 0.5 mM glutamate, EJC amplitudes were reduced to less than 50 nA and kinetics were slowed such that EJCs lasted 100–200 ms (Fig. Above 1 mM glutamate, EJC amplitudes and kinetics were further altered in a dose-dependent fashion (Fig. In 3 mM extracellular glutamate, EJCs were undetectable. In 3 mM extracellular glutamate, EJCs were undetectable. As all cells tend to sequester and metabolize glutamate, some measurement variation could be due to differences in hemolymph extraction, or contamination by hemocytes (Ribeiro and Brehelin 2006). 