In a large retrospective study of pediatric patients with PTC who had extended follow-up, partial thyroidectomies carried larger rates of disease recurrence than bilateral thyroidectomies.1 Further understanding of the genetics of pediatric PTC may help stratify patients and identify subgroups who could safely be treated with subtotal thyroidectomy. Despite having an excellent prognosis with long-term mortality rates of less than 1%,1,2 pediatric patients with PTC tend to present with advanced disease often with increased rates of extrathyroidal tumor extension, lymphovascular invasion, and distant metastases.1,3-5 Family history for thyroid and nonthyroid malignancy was evaluated and extended only to first-degree relatives. BRAF variants were verified by Sanger DNA sequencing using an ABI 3500 (LifeTechnologies, Carlsbad, California).The DNA from pediatric tumors was also evaluated for RAS mutation as previously reported by using real-time LightCycler PCR (Roche) with melting curve analysis.29 Screened mutations included HRAS codon 61, NRAS codon 61, and KRAS codons 12 and 13.Fluorescence In Situ Hybridization.—Unstained slides were prepared from the tissue blocks used for DNA extraction. Tissue was assessed for the presence of common RET rearrangements by using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). Between 37% and 52% of PTCs have been linked to the specific BRAF mutation V600E, and clinical correlations support that this foretells a more aggressive disease course in adults.6-9 The incidence of this BRAF mutation in the pediatric population is thought to be lower than in adults with rates of 0% to 37%,10-15 though 1 recent series16 revealed a rate of 63%. Subsequent sequencing of the BRAF region identified a 3—base pair deletion mutation (c.1799_1801delTGA). If this mutation is counted with the classic mutation (for a rate of 38%), the pediatric BRAF mutation rate is still significantly less than that of the adult population (P = .04). Given the common signaling pathway of these oncogenes, constitutive activation in any one member has been considered a mutually exclusive event.25-27 However, more recent studies12,28 have identified that co-mutation does occur. The results of this study illustrate that while the BRAF V600E mutation is present in a substantial portion of adult PTCs, it is significantly less prevalent in PTC from pediatric patients. The rate of 31% in the pediatric patients in this study is within the range reported among most similar studies, but is somewhat on the high side (see Table 5). The relationship of BRAF mutation and age is apparent even within the adult group. When comparing patients with at least 1 lymph node examined, we see lymph node metastases in 9 of 12 pediatric tumors (75%) and 19 of 32 adult tumors (59%), which was not a significant difference (P = .27). Hou and colleagues32 identified kinetic properties of the product of this BRAF mutation that resemble the V600E mutant with constitutive activation. Of particular interest is the presence of concomitant mutation of BRAF and a RET rearrangement detected in 1 of the tumors. 