Boys discussed fear of family, peers and community members who might question their presence at the clinic: Like, with the boys, when we are at the youth [centre] perhaps, we are waiting over there, we are going to get jabbed with the needle… They tend to be shy perhaps to come in. For example, one clinician stated: For example, one clinician stated: Where you go and you do a campaign and you say we’ve got this – and again, it’s solution offering – we’ve got this system where for your life choices we can offer you something that’s gonna give you much better protection … Much better protection for when you become sexually active. The [HIV] negative teens that I’m thinking of, they know about risky behaviour, they know about their partner possibly having been with someone else. [T]hey will go to the clinic and then get tested - maybe [they] get a negative [result], then they will get PrEP, then come out. Even your boys won’t care that, like, “Oh, he’s using the medication!” They would know that it’s PrEP. So it’s obvious that I am [HIV] negative.” (HIV-negative female adolescent; individual interview)Adolescents described that peers who are equipped with the “mentality that PrEP is not 100% [effective]” will be more compelled to continue HIV testing. So it’s obvious that I am [HIV] negative.” (HIV-negative female adolescent; individual interview)Adolescents described that peers who are equipped with the “mentality that PrEP is not 100% [effective]” will be more compelled to continue HIV testing. As you mentioned the fact that a friend will come and say I must pour her some pills, maybe other person is afraid to go to the clinic, she is afraid of testing, maybe the results will be positive, and she will go to her friend and her friend will not be knowing the treatment is not being shared, she will come and say “Friend, please pour me PrEP, I hear that there is a PrEP, whatever, please give me half,” and she will give her, it’s because she is scared of going and get tested, so that she can get her PrEP. We found three main themes from our qualitative analysis. Gill et al  (2017) found that PrEP was safe and tolerable in those who continued use, although adherence was an issue, in the PlusPills study. Gill et al  (2017) found that PrEP was safe and tolerable in those who continued use, although adherence was an issue, in the PlusPills study. Gill et al  (2017) found that PrEP was safe and tolerable in those who continued use, although adherence was an issue, in the PlusPills study. A full suite of HIV-prevention approaches that align with a “status-neutral” approach to HIV (where prevention and care engagement are approached in the same way for those living with as those who are not) is necessary in the implementation of PrEP (Myers et al , 2018). Discontinued HIV testing may occur after ongoing PrEP use so there must be structures for continued testing such as, for example, offering or incentivizing testing prior to prescription refills, creating accessible and available testing sites, and delivering developmentally appropriate education on why continued HIV testing is important. During ongoing use of PrEP, HIV-testing continuation should also be studied to assess what barriers exist for continued HIV testing and what can be changed. During ongoing use of PrEP, HIV-testing continuation should also be studied to assess what barriers exist for continued HIV testing and what can be changed. During ongoing use of PrEP, HIV-testing continuation should also be studied to assess what barriers exist for continued HIV testing and what can be changed. During ongoing use of PrEP, HIV-testing continuation should also be studied to assess what barriers exist for continued HIV testing and what can be changed. Second, none of the adolescents were currently using PrEP so all data is subject to their own perceptions of what they had heard about PrEP. Second, none of the adolescents were currently using PrEP so all data is subject to their own perceptions of what they had heard about PrEP. Third, we did not systematically collect detailed information about providers’ work histories such as years in service or current employment information. Additional research is necessary to consider broader implementation issues for adolescent PrEP including training for providers, adolescent-friendly testing and clinical spaces, costs of PrEP medication and programmes, supply-chain issues, and medication adherence concerns. Interviews were conducted in isiXhosa or English based on participant preference. Prior to the start of each focus group and interview, facilitators provided adolescents with a clear and developmentally appropriate description of oral PrEP, including information about efficacy, side effects, HIV-testing requirements, and the importance of medication adherence. Prior to the start of each focus group and interview, facilitators provided adolescents with a clear and developmentally appropriate description of oral PrEP, including information about efficacy, side effects, HIV-testing requirements, and the importance of medication adherence. Focus groups and interviews were guided by semi-structured protocols; focus group questions explored normative beliefs and behaviours while in-depth interviews probed more personal aspects of behavioural decision-making and HIV-risk perception. Focus group discussions and individual interviews were digitally audiotaped and lasted about 60 to 90 minutes. Participants received R 150 (~USD 10) for completing focus group and/or individual interviews, respectively. Service providers were recruited from clinic settings in the same urban township. Service providers were eligible for the study if they (a) were at least 18 years old and (b) had at least three years’ experience providing services to adolescents. Service providers were not employees of the research team. Coder training entailed the coders independently reviewing a subset of transcripts to ensure a consistent interpretation of the text and application of the coding scheme. We used the Braun and Clarke (2006) thematic analysis framework for coding transcripts and interpreting findings. Participant characteristicsA full quantitative description of the study sample can be found in Giovenco et al  (2018). Adolescents and young people represent a growing key population that stands to benefit from PrEP. Thematic findingsThree themes relevant to the overarching study aims were identified: (HIV-negative female adolescent; individual interview)Boys and girls recalled different types of testing-related stigma. (HIV-positive female adolescent; individual interview)Stigma may manifest for adolescents through gossip in the clinics. (HIV-positive female adolescent; individual interview)Stigma may manifest for adolescents through gossip in the clinics. (HIV-positive female adolescent; individual interview)Stigma may manifest for adolescents through gossip in the clinics. 