In previous studies, the use of co-culture chambers without physical contact has facilitated the investigation of chemical communication between interacting planktonic organisms (Microcystis strains in Schatz et al , 2005, or diatoms/bacteria in Paul et al , 2013). LC-MS and molecular networking approaches revealed the high chemodiversity of MicrocystisTo profile the chemical output from MC- and non-MC-producing M. aeruginosa strains, two complementary approaches were used. Further chemical studies are needed to firmly establish their structures.We also gained new insight into the wide diversity of secondary metabolites produced by these freshwater cyanobacteria as the spectral networks identified a total of 546 compounds. Recent genome mining of the studied strains has revealed their potential to produce more natural products than the MC, cyanopeptolins, aeruginosins, cyanobactins and anabaenopeptins (Frangeul et al , 2008; Humbert et al , 2013; Leikoski et al , 2013). The WT and NT genomes contain, respectively, seven and nine gene clusters involved in the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites (Humbert et al , 2013). The expansion of genomic mining techniques to predict structures and identify products of new pathways remains a challenge and opportunity for the future. Microcystis bioactive peptides may have complementary or interchangeable functionsDespite their different metabolic profiles, the three strains grew comparably under monoculture conditions, as reported for the WT and MT under several growth conditions (Dittmann et al , 1997; Hesse et al , 2001; Briand et al , 2012). The production of several peptides by MT strain was stimulated with a significant increase in concentration up to 12-fold for Arg 684, 8-fold for Cya 963A and from 3- to 4-fold for Aer A, B and C over WT; and several new analogues of the cyanopeptolins and aerucyclamides were mainly produced by the MT. To date, most effort at understanding the function of cyanopeptides has focused on MC. Recently, the MC, aeruginosins and cyanopeptolins were reported as the most widely distributed secondary metabolites in Microcystis (Humbert et al , 2013), whereas anabaenopeptins, cyanopeptolins and MC are metabolites that occurred most frequently in Planktothrix (Kurmayer et al , 2014). However, a final answer can only be found through bioassay-guided structure elucidation of the active compounds. However, a final answer can only be found through bioassay-guided structure elucidation of the active compounds. Taken together, these results suggest that cooperation processes may take place preferentially when the cells are physically in contact, but additional experiments need to be performed to explore this hypothesis.This work shows that even without cell contact, physiological responses to co-culturing are reflected in the stimulation of the production of the major produced peptides. Likewise, it was previously observed that MC production was increased in WT under co-culture conditions with MT (Briand et al , 2012). Moreover, the addition of MC-producing cell extract, external MC-LR, micro-peptin or microginin induced a specific response on secondary metabolite gene expression (Schatz et al , 2007; Makower et al , 2014). Numerous studies suggested an intracellular role of MC giving competitive advantage to the toxic strains under different abiotic conditions. However, the lack of field studies, showing the presence of active substances in the environment and their effect on target organisms, is evident and needs to be filled. 6).The exchange of dissolved organic compounds between the two chambers was tested knowing that compounds of around 100 Da diffuse within the first few hours (Paul et al , 2013). The cultures were maintained in exponential growth phase by repeated dilution in fresh culture medium, whereas the axenicity was regularly evaluated as in Briand and colleagues (2012). The cultures were maintained in exponential growth phase by repeated dilution in fresh culture medium, whereas the axenicity was regularly evaluated as in Briand and colleagues (2012). Samples were evaporated to dryness under N2 and kept frozen until analysis.Dry intra- and extracellular extracts were dissolved with acetonitrile (ACN; EMD Chemicals, Gibbstown, NJ, USA) and internal standard (BOC-L-protected Ornithine, 0.25 mg ml−1 in ACN; Chem-Impex International, Wood Dale, IL, USA) was added before HPLC-MS/MS analysis. High-performance liquid chromatography electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (HPLC-ESI-MS/MS) analysisEach sample (20 μl) was injected twice into a reverse-phase HPLC system using a Phenomenex Kinetex C18 column (5 μm, 100 mm × 4.60 mm) with a gradient of 5–99% ACN in water with 0.1% formic acid over 12 min, held at 99% for 5 min, and then returned to 5% at 22 min for another 3 min. Further, the mass differences between and the relative intensity of isotopic peaks were analyzed to gain information on the presence of possible halogen atoms (e.g. The input data were simultaneously searched against annotated reference spectra in the GNPS spectral library. Statistical analysisDifferences in growth rates and normalized relative concentrations were evaluated using one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post test or two-tailed t-test. Statistical analysisDifferences in growth rates and normalized relative concentrations were evaluated using one-way ANOVA with Tukey’s post test or two-tailed t-test. Growth of M. aeruginosa strains in mono-, co-culture and MC-LR addition experimentsThe growth of the three strains (WT, MT and NT) displayed the same growth rates in monoculture (Table 1). Description of secondary metabolic profiles of M. aeruginosa strains in monoculturesFor the three strains in monoculture, we could identify by LC-MS 12 peptides produced by the WT, the same ones without MC by the MT, and 12 others by the NT (Fig. Four were already described cyanopeptolin metabolites (Cya A, B, C and Cya 963A with a quasi-molecular ion at m/z 946 [M-H2O]+), whereas the other six are new species with m/z 896, 915, 949, 963, 965 and 979 Da (Figs S3 and S4). The cyanopeptolins produced by the NT presented another partial sequence, Ahp–Phe–MePhe, as characterized by the following series of fragments m/z 134, 215, 243, 292 and 404 (Fig. S4).Additionally, several cyanobactins were produced by the three strains, all corresponding to previously identified compounds. 1A and B) and the NT produced two short linear cyanobactins: aeruginosamide B and C (compounds 16 and 17 in Fig. To evaluate the accuracy of the spectral count quantitation method, a correlation analysis was performed between the spectral counts and the internal standard methods. 