We have shown that we can detect both toxins individually using SERS, with no additional sensing probe molecule. We have shown that we can detect both toxins individually using SERS, with no additional sensing probe molecule. We have shown that we can detect both toxins individually using SERS, with no additional sensing probe molecule. Through this work we have noted that hydrogen bonding associates the two mycotoxins to the polymer through the amine groups. Through this work we have noted that hydrogen bonding associates the two mycotoxins to the polymer through the amine groups. With a short chain length, there might be insufficient repeat unit binding sites for target-analyte interaction due to dense packing of the short polymer chains at the substrate surface.15 In this work, we focus on the use of SERS and linear polymers as affinity agents for multiplex analyte detection. To demonstrate the full potential of linear polymer affinity agents, this work focuses on multiplex detection of two different small molecule targets of interest: deoxynivalenol and ochratoxin A. While various analytical techniques have been used to detect each of these toxins at low limits of detection27,28,29,30,31,32,33, direct multiplex detection of these toxins together with a single affinity agent has not been done. The mixture was dialyzed in a 100–500 Da MWCO membrane against 3 L of Milli-Q water for 24 h. This was then lyophilized resulting in a dry, light yellow solid with a yield of 78%. Isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC)ITC measurements were performed using a MicroCal PEAQ-ITC Automated (Malvern Instruments, Westborough, MA) at 25 °C as previously discussed in previous literature.15,16 The sample cell and injection syringe were cleaned with 20% Contrad 70 detergent, water, and methanol. Isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC)ITC measurements were performed using a MicroCal PEAQ-ITC Automated (Malvern Instruments, Westborough, MA) at 25 °C as previously discussed in previous literature.15,16 The sample cell and injection syringe were cleaned with 20% Contrad 70 detergent, water, and methanol. Isothermal titration calorimetry (ITC)ITC measurements were performed using a MicroCal PEAQ-ITC Automated (Malvern Instruments, Westborough, MA) at 25 °C as previously discussed in previous literature.15,16 The sample cell and injection syringe were cleaned with 20% Contrad 70 detergent, water, and methanol. The instrument automatedly transferred polymer into the mycotoxin samples (or into blank solvent for the background titration). Raw ITC profiles (Figure S2a and S2b) are measured as heat flow rate against time where each peak refers to the injected sample. FONs with a localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) λmax between 750 and 850 nm, measured using a fiber optic probe (Ocean Optics, Dunedin, Florida) with a flat gold film as the reflective standard, were used for these studies. These relatively thick, polymer templates make it difficult to use surface analytical techniques for target detection due to the fact that the majority of the sensing volume is occupied by the polymer matrix rather than the matrix with captured analytes. These relatively thick, polymer templates make it difficult to use surface analytical techniques for target detection due to the fact that the majority of the sensing volume is occupied by the polymer matrix rather than the matrix with captured analytes. Samples were prepared in a biosafety level II hood (BSCII). All instrumentation, benchtops, and hoods are sprayed with a 10% bleach solution and wiped down to avoid any harmful effects. DFT modeling of deoxynivalenol and ochratoxin ARaman detection of DON in agricultural products by Yuan et al 45 modeled the small molecule with density functional theory (DFT). Previous Raman detection of OTA has relied on dye molecules,29 changes in aptamer conformation,46 and other intensity-amplifying attachments30 in order to sense the small molecule. Previous computational work has labeled the vibrational modes of the AEMA monomer and the CTA anchoring group that make up the affinity agent.15 The computed Raman spectrum for the AEMA monomer can be seen in the SI (Figure S3). Distinct and visible spectral changes are observed at concentrations as low as the OTA regulatory limit (0.005 ppm/5 ppb). Multiplex SERS detection of deoxynivalenol and ochratoxin A with pAEMA29In an effort to detect both toxins simultaneously, both DON and OTA were placed in solution with pAEMA29 to give both the opportunity to complex with the polymer affinity agent via the hypothesized hydrogen bonding/association. 