First, DBDs, characterized by noncompliance, aggression, and defiance, are the second most common (19.1%) reason for child referral to mental health services, and low-income youth are more likely to be referred than their higher-income counterparts (Heiervang et al , 2007; Merikangas et al , 2010; Merikangas, Nakamura, & Kessler, 2009; also see Forehand, Jones, & Parent, 2013, for a review). This family took 14 weeks to complete the program, longer than any other family in the TE-HNC group (i.e., Range 7 to 14; also see Table 3). At baseline, the mother reported her daughter’s disruptive behavior in the clinical range on both the ECBI Intensity Scale (Intensity score = 221) and Problem Scale (Problem score = 33).Case 7 dropped out of the study after session three. At baseline, the mother reported that her son exhibited disruptive behavior below the clinical range on ECBI Intensity Scale (Intensity Score = 124), but above the clinical range on the Problem Scale (Problem score = 20).This family’s overall technology use was above the other TE-HNC participants (i.e., 78% compared to 65%). At baseline, the father reported that his daughter exhibited disruptive behaviors in the clinical range on both ECBI scales (Intensity Score = 133; Problem score = 23).This family’s overall technology use exceeded the use of other TE-HNC families (i.e., 75% compared to 66%). During the postassessment, this father indicated that he believed all of the smartphone enhancements were useful; however, he indicated that the Midweek Videoconference was least useful: “If I must give an answer then it would be the midweek call. That said, the relative lack of within-group variability may suggest participants in the TE-HNC group were unique in some way (e.g., families would be high engagers regardless of technology use); however, it is important to remember that random assignment to group in the pilot RCT should have decreased the likelihood of this group being unique. Despite the aforementioned caveats, the case series design still provided a preliminary window into how variability in use of and attitudes toward technology may correspond with outcomes in technology-enhanced services. Barriers to engagement in BPT are varied and complex, but include acute and chronic socioeconomic-related stressors that make navigating time-intensive and demanding clinic-based BPT services (i.e., 12 to 28 session hours, midweek telephone check-ins, daily home practice of skills) more challenging (see Eyberg et al , 2008; McMahon & Forehand, 2003; Reyno & McGrath, 2006; Thomas & Zimmer-Gembeck, 2007, for reviews). For example, in Case 1 the relatively consistent and high rate of smartphone enhancement use may account for the above average pre-post treatment change scores, and, in turn, full treatment response. This comparative deficit in use may account for the extra weeks required to master the HNC skills and the minimal treatment response on the ECBI Problem scale (Eyberg & Pincus, 1999). While the literature suggests that many client factors (e.g., comfort with and exposure to technology) influence the use or uptake of technology-enhanced service delivery methods, client attitudes towards technology are considered a central context in which to understand use, and, in turn, treatment outcomes (e.g., Reed et al , 2014; Venkatesh et al , 2003; Waller & Gilbody, 2009). While there is research to suggest that the relationship between use and attitudes towards technology may be bidirectional (i.e., attitudes towards technology improve with increased exposure to the technology and vice versa; Reed et al , 2014), this finding highlights the importance of assessing clients’ attitudes towards each component of a technology-enhanced intervention. Importantly, our findings suggest that families used these technologyenhancements at a fairly high rate, yet patterns of variability suggested that those who used it more or more regularly might have benefited the most. Importantly, our findings suggest that families used these technologyenhancements at a fairly high rate, yet patterns of variability suggested that those who used it more or more regularly might have benefited the most. Accordingly, it is expected that there will be variability in use of and attitudes toward the range of smartphone components within and between caregivers randomized to TE-HNC, that higher levels of use of each smartphone component will parallel more positive attitudes toward the component, and that use and attitudes will correspond with improvement in disruptive behaviors at posttreatment, as well as the efficiency with which families complete the mastery-based HNC program. ParticipantsLow-income (i.e., adjusted gross income did not exceed 150% of the federal poverty limit) caregiver-child dyads were included in the pilot RCT if they had a 3- to 8-year-old child (i.e., range for which HNC was developed and tested) and the child met or exceeded clinical cutoffs on the Eyberg Child Behavior Inventory (ECBI; Eyberg & Pincus, 1999). ParticipantsLow-income (i.e., adjusted gross income did not exceed 150% of the federal poverty limit) caregiver-child dyads were included in the pilot RCT if they had a 3- to 8-year-old child (i.e., range for which HNC was developed and tested) and the child met or exceeded clinical cutoffs on the Eyberg Child Behavior Inventory (ECBI; Eyberg & Pincus, 1999). ParticipantsLow-income (i.e., adjusted gross income did not exceed 150% of the federal poverty limit) caregiver-child dyads were included in the pilot RCT if they had a 3- to 8-year-old child (i.e., range for which HNC was developed and tested) and the child met or exceeded clinical cutoffs on the Eyberg Child Behavior Inventory (ECBI; Eyberg & Pincus, 1999). Caregivers in TE-HNC were 91% female, 91% biological parents, 64% married or in a long-term relationship, and on average 33 years old (SD = 6.71). Advancement to the subsequent skill (e.g., Attends to Rewards) or phase (e.g., Phase I to Phase II) is dependent on caregivers meeting specific behavioral performance criteria for the prior skill and set of skills during structured play (i.e., Child’s Game or Parent’s Game), which is observed and coded by therapists at each session. Advancement to the subsequent skill (e.g., Attends to Rewards) or phase (e.g., Phase I to Phase II) is dependent on caregivers meeting specific behavioral performance criteria for the prior skill and set of skills during structured play (i.e., Child’s Game or Parent’s Game), which is observed and coded by therapists at each session. Promising trends from a pilot RCT comparing TE-HNC to the standard HNC program suggest that these smartphone enhancements increased the engagement of low-income families in service (i.e., session attendance, participation in Midweek Videoconference, and home practice higher in TE-HNC than HNC), enhanced the efficiency of services (i.e., TE-HNC families required fewer weeks to master program skills than HNC), and boosted treatment outcomes (i.e., effect size and analyses of clinical significance favored TE-HNC relative to HNC) (Jones et al , 2014). In addition, the discussion highlights themes, or similar reactions to each smartphone component shared by the majority of cases (i.e., at least 5), and explores the influence of these reactions on the correspondence between use and treatment outcomes.Treatment ResponseTreatment response was examined in two ways for the 7 TE-HNC completers only:Pre- to postassessment change in disruptive behavior was assessed using the Eyberg Child Behavior Inventory (EBCI), a 36-item inventory for 2- to 16-year-olds (Eyberg & Pincus, 1999). Then, analysis of potential links between smartphone technology use, treatment response, perceived usefulness, and service delivery efficiency is provided for completers only (n = 7).Treatment response is characterized by comparing the pre-post treatment ECBI (Eyberg & Pincus, 1999) change score in the current study to the aggregated pre-post ECBI change scores published in prior studies of standard BPT programs (see Self-Brown et al , 2012; Ware et al , 2008 for meta-analyses). This caregiver at postassessment indicated that the Skills Videos were the least useful smartphone-enhancement out of the four components. This perception of lack of usefulness may be linked to this caregiver’s relatively lower use of this component.This family’s percentage of use corresponded with full treatment response [i.e., more than a 44 point improvement on the Intensity score and more than a 13 point improvement on the Problem score of the ECBI (Eyberg & Pincus, 1999)]. At postassessment he indicated, “Videos on the iPhone are small and do not lend themselves towards keeping your attention. 