Results in the sensitivity analyses were similar using measures of BMI at all ages >45 years (Table S3) and using maximum BMI, supporting the attenuating role of the appetite disinhibition in relation to GRS and BMI (Table S4). for an adult of average height (1.7 m). Based on our findings, we think appetite disinhibition – overeating in response to external food cues – is a focal behavior underpinning genetic variation in susceptibility to the obesogenic environment. Behavioral studies have shown aberrations in neurobehavioral markers of appetite, including the tendency to eat in the absence of hunger, and hyper-responsiveness to food cues among children (ref. Its expression is likely strongly dependent on the food environment, and the current ubiquity of external food cues provides the ideal context for full expression of this trait. The declining rate of weight gain during later adulthood in our findings suggests that hunger may decline incrementally from mid-life to older ages.Longitudinal data on genetic influences on clinically measured BMI trajectories from midlife to older age are rare (ref. Strengths and limitationsWe used a well-validated instrument to assess eating inventories in our study sample. In adults, elevated genetic risk of obesity is also associated with appetite, blunted satiety (ref. S1) and the sample size was reduced because genotype data were missing. S1) and the sample size was reduced because genotype data were missing. 15) and high responsiveness to external food cues (ref. 15) and high responsiveness to external food cues (ref. However, replication studies, including children and young adults as well as older adults, of the independent and joint effects of obesity-related genes and appetite disinhibition in relation to BMI trajectories would be useful. Such cues may be direct, e.g. Experimental studies show that such indirect cues increase motivation to actively seek out and consume food in the absence of hunger (ref. Measuring disinhibition and identifying problematic eating behaviors and environmental triggers could allow clinical advisors to support their patients to develop strategies to manage eating behavior and achieve weight-loss goals. Measuring disinhibition and identifying problematic eating behaviors and environmental triggers could allow clinical advisors to support their patients to develop strategies to manage eating behavior and achieve weight-loss goals. In 1997–1999, the baseline for this study, 6,551 individuals participated in the research clinic for medical check-up. At the 2003-2004 clinic, participants of European ancestry provided blood, which was used for genotyping BMI-associated SNPs. Disinhibition may involve several behavioural traits: high responsiveness to external food cues e.g. Among the 6,551 individuals who participated at the clinic screening in 1997-1999, the Eating Inventory (EI) was administered to 5,308 (81%) (Fig. Adiposity MeasurementBMI was calculated as weight(kg)/height(m)2 based on clinic measurements following standard protocols (ref. Genotyping with the metabochip, a custom Illumina iSelect genotyping array, was successful for 5441 participants (78.7% of 6914 phase 7 participants) of whom 5067 reported European ethnicity (ref. We calculated a genetic risk score (GRS) for all available BMI-related loci on each individual, based on an additive model of genetic risk. Also, using just one observation per participant, we estimated the effects of appetite-related traits on the associations of GRS with the maximum BMI attained during follow-up using multiple regression and used the bootstrap method with 2,000 re-samplings to calculate 95% CI for these attenuations as a sensitivity analysis (Supplementary files). All analyses were conducted using STATA 15.1 (StataCorp, College Station, TX, USA). 