Myeloid cells appear to be dysregulated in COVID-19 and, although reports are inconsistent, increases in pro-inflammatory monocytes that produce high levels of IL-6 and other cytokines and have low MHC class-II expression may be related to dysfunctional innate and adaptive immunity and disease status (46). Understanding the time-dose dependency of LDRT effects will be very challenging but crucial for dissecting LDRT’s therapeutic potential, if any. Prior SARS-CoV-2 exposure and recovery may also promote sensitivity and susceptibility to RT-mediated lung injury and fibrosis in cancer patients. Given the use of ionizing radiation for a purpose other than treating cancer, potential life-time radiation risks and regulatory aspects of the use of radiation for LDRT were discussed. Overall COVID-19 mortality is <5%, with a higher loss of life expectancy than death from radiation-induced cancer or circulatory disease. While there was a general consensus that LDRT for COVID-19 should be utilized only within a framework of rigorous and well-designed clinical studies, there was no agreement on whether safety data are sufficient and whether there is adequate rationale to proceed with clinical trials. Without supporting or refuting LDRT for COVID-19 as a treatment, this review intends to assist clinicians and researchers who plan to conduct preclinical and clinical studies, given the limited evidence on the safety and efficacy of LDRT for COVID-19. Recognizing that improved treatments for severely ill patients with COVID19 are necessary, any trial that is performed must be done cautiously, with full appropriate IRB oversight and must be cognizant of rapid changes in the biological understanding of the phases of the illness and the standard of care in this patient cohort. The impetus for LDRT comes from case studies of patients treated with thoracic radiation for pneumonia between 1905 and 1943, which suggest clinical improvement (7, 8). Given the paucity of preclinical data and limited interpretability of the historical data, some workshop participants insisted on the need to establish the efficacy of LDRT in animal models of SARS-CoV-2 before testing in human clinical trials, opining that LDRT is not indicated (9). While several other COVID-19 therapies are being evaluated, to date, only two drugs have shown improved outcomes: the steroid Dexamethasone lowers the odds of death (10), and the antiviral Remdesivir shortens oxygen dependency and recovery time but does not improve survival (11). Further, there might be differences in the dynamics of response of endothelial cells between preclinical models and humans to a given dose of radiation. The first published peer-reviewed results from the U.S. are from a safety trial of 1.5 Gy LDRT in elderly patients (median age 90), with bilateral pulmonary infiltrates, oxygen dependence without mechanical ventilation, and high comorbidity burdens ‒ factors known to predispose patients to a worse outcome (2). Most of these trials are open-label, single institution, non-randomized studies, but some randomized trials are also emerging. The pathological evolution toward severe ailment does not always depend on viral load and culminates in a combination of symptoms. The evidence for some effectiveness of anti-viral therapy during the moderate phase and steroid therapy during the severe phase was also presented. A reanalysis of several animal datasets from experiments performed decades ago testing RT for bacterial and viral pneumonia reveal that results are heterogeneous, but collectively indicate lack of efficacy of RT after infection (https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.02625v3). SARS-CoV-2 in the lung targets primarily bronchial and alveolar epithelial cells, but other targets are likely, including immune cells. Immune cells, especially the myeloid subsets, are activated to phagocytose debris in the inflammatory site while dendritic cells (DC) present antigen to stimulate adaptive immunity in primary lymphoid tissues. Vascular endothelial cells play a central role in responding to and producing cytokines that further drive cytokine production and lead to a coagulation response, mainly through the extrinsic pathway involving tissue factor and Factor VIIa. Since endothelial cells are relatively radiosensitive, LDRT-mediated benefit may be linked to an inhibitory effect on coagulopathy, which needs to be verified. Given these findings, it is not surprising that attempts are being made to target inflammation in COVID-19 (43), including IL-6 blocking antibodies, IL-1R agonists, NADPH oxidase (NOX) inhibitors, dexamethasone, JAK1 inhibitors, and now LDRT. Figure 3 illustrates the timeline of dynamic changes in lungs resulting from SARS-CoV-2 exposure, causing anti-viral immune response and inflammatory response, leading to ARDS and multiorgan failure due to hyperinflammation. 