Age P24/25 Chx10∷DTA and wild type littermates were allowed to run at constant speed on a clear treadmill belt while digital video was recorded from underneath the treadmill to mark when each of the four limbs was in contact with the treadmill belt. DigiGait software was used to measure the average stride length and frequency for each limb, as well as the duration of stride, stance and swing phases. Speed-dependent gait change from left-right alternation to synchrony in Chx10∷DTA miceIn the normal adult mouse, left-right coordination is an important characteristic of the gait at all speeds. Examples of the phase values for hind legs of a wild type and a Chx10∷DTA mouse during 20 consecutive steps at 25, 45, 65, and 85 cm/s are shown in Figure 4B. A rate of 7 steps/s was chosen to divide the wild type trials into slow (<7 steps/s; n= 31 trials) and fast groups (7-9 steps/s; n= 32 trials). We analyzed the regularity of L2 ventral root rhythmic bursting cycle frequency using autocorrelation analysis during fictive locomotion evoked by 6μM NMDA and 6μM 5-HT. We tested this hypothesis by determining whether there is a significant relationship between the left-right phase (measured by the value of the cross-correlation coefficient), and the burst frequency. As shown in Figure 5G, linear regression analysis of this relationship showed that in the wild type spinal cord, there is no significant relationship between burst frequency and left-right phase (n=31, r=0.067; p>0.1). Here we make use of genetic variation in different mouse strains to avert the neonatal lethality after targeted ablation of V2a neurons. Here we make use of genetic variation in different mouse strains to avert the neonatal lethality after targeted ablation of V2a neurons. Here we make use of genetic variation in different mouse strains to avert the neonatal lethality after targeted ablation of V2a neurons. We also analyzed the relationship between burst frequency and ipsilateral flexor-extensor phase in the wild type and Chx10∷DTA spinal cords, but no significant relationship was found in either strain, demonstrating that flexor-extensor phasing is maintained at all frequencies. As illustrated in Figure 6B, the value at zero of the crosscorrelogram is less negative at the higher frequency when the burst frequency is higher. Circular analysis shows that the left-right phase loses its significant alternation at the higher frequency; this reverses upon return to 6:6μM NMDA and 5-HT (Figure 6B and 6C). Bouts of fictive locomotion can be evoked by more natural stimuli such as sensory nerve or hindbrain stimulation. Bouts of fictive locomotion can be evoked by more natural stimuli such as sensory nerve or hindbrain stimulation. Bouts of fictive locomotion can be evoked by more natural stimuli such as sensory nerve or hindbrain stimulation. Bouts of fictive locomotion can be evoked by more natural stimuli such as sensory nerve or hindbrain stimulation. Bouts of fictive locomotion can be evoked by more natural stimuli such as sensory nerve or hindbrain stimulation. Although left-right limb coordination is altered in Chx10∷DTA mice at fast speed, alternation of fore and hind legs and the relative duration of swing and stance phases for individual limbs is unchanged compared to wild type mice. We decided to intercross the Chx10∷DTA males with ICR females, and found increased survival (40%) in Chx10∷DTA offspring on this mixed ICR/BL6/129 genetic background. Thus, locomotion can be initiated in vivo and in vitro in the absence of V2a interneurons. V2a interneurons control gait at high speedRunning on a treadmill, as the speed increases, Chx10∷DTA mice switch from a trot to a poorly coordinated intermediate state and finally to a gallop, whereas wild type mice show a trotting gait at all speeds. The coordination of left-right motor activity is mediated by CIN systems that are functionally inhibitory or excitatory (Bracci et al , 1996; Butt and Kiehn, 2003; Cazalets et al , 1994; Cohen and Harris-Warrick, 1984; Cowley and Schmidt, 1995; Hagevik and McClellan, 1994; Hinckley et al , 2005; Quinlan and Kiehn, 2007). The coordination of left-right motor activity is mediated by CIN systems that are functionally inhibitory or excitatory (Bracci et al , 1996; Butt and Kiehn, 2003; Cazalets et al , 1994; Cohen and Harris-Warrick, 1984; Cowley and Schmidt, 1995; Hagevik and McClellan, 1994; Hinckley et al , 2005; Quinlan and Kiehn, 2007). Our previous study provided anatomical evidence that V2a neurons provide excitatory drive to the functionally inhibitory CIN system including the V0 class of CINs. The alternative system might also include V0 interneurons, which would then receive excitatory drive from unidentified interneurons other than V2a interneurons. Breeding was performed as follows: prm-Cre; chx10∷LNL∷DTA male mice, on a mixed C57/BL6 and 129/S6/SvEv (ES cell component) genetic background, were bred to ICR females to produce heterozygous offspring with a single copy of the recombined chx10∷DTA allele (Chx10∷DTA mice) or homozygous littermates with two wild type chx10 alleles (wild type littermates). Supp2Supplementary VideosDigital video footage (135 frames/s) was filmed from underneath a clear treadmill belt of mice running at the speeds indicated below. Biotinylated secondary antibodies (Donkey, 1:500) followed by ABC amplification (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) and DAB color reaction (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) were used visualize staining. The color reaction was then performed in 1.25% sodium sulfide (pH 6.0) for 8 min. Gait analysisThe DigiGait instrument (Mouse Specifics, Inc., Boston, MA) was used to analyze gait in 11 Chx10∷DTA and 11 wild type littermates age P24-25. Each animal was allowed to run on a clear treadmill belt (with a digital camera underneath to record paw placement) at speeds of 15, 25, 35, 45, 55, 65, 75, 85, and 95 centimeters per second (cm/s). Mice were rested at least 10 s between trials (of ∼5 s each) and at least 60 min after 30 trials to prevent tiring. DigiGait software was used to identify stance and swing phases for all four limbs in every video frame, and to measure average values for stride length and stride frequency, as well as duration of stride, stance, and swing for each limb. The hindlimb phase was calculated for each step by dividing the time between the start of the right and left hindlimb stance divided by the duration of the right hindlimb step cycle (see Figure 4A). The hindlimb phase was calculated for each step by dividing the time between the start of the right and left hindlimb stance divided by the duration of the right hindlimb step cycle (see Figure 4A). The hindlimb phase was calculated for each step by dividing the time between the start of the right and left hindlimb stance divided by the duration of the right hindlimb step cycle (see Figure 4A). The hindlimb phase was calculated for each step by dividing the time between the start of the right and left hindlimb stance divided by the duration of the right hindlimb step cycle (see Figure 4A). The hindlimb phase was calculated for each step by dividing the time between the start of the right and left hindlimb stance divided by the duration of the right hindlimb step cycle (see Figure 4A). In some experiments, the caudal end of the spinal cord was dissected and locomotor-like activity was reliably induced by stimulating the entire caudal end of the spinal cord (Gordon and Whelan, 2006; Whelan et al , 2000; Zhong et al , 2007). Ventral root recordings were bandpass filtered (100 Hz to 1 kHz) and recorded using an alternating current amplifier (model 1600; A-M Systems, Carlsborg, WA). Correlation analysisThe ventral root extracellular data were integrated and smoothed with a time constant of 0.2s and analyzed using custom written programs in Spike 2 (Cambridge Electronic Design, Cambridge, UK). At least 10 min of data were analyzed for each measurement. The mean and standard error (SE) values were obtained from the entire set. In our earlier study (Crone et al , 2008), all the progeny of wild type inbred BL6 dams that receive a copy of the recombined Chx10∷DTA allele from male BL6/129 mice died before three days of postnatal life, likely due to respiratory difficulty (see methods for details of breeding strategies and various mouse strains). We asked whether the genetic background of the dam could improve the survival of progeny that carry a copy of the recombined Chx10∷DTA allele. In survival studies, 40% (31/78) of the progeny of ICR dams that carried one copy of the Chx10∷DTA allele survived past 3 weeks of age. We examined expression of the transcription factor GATA-3 in Chx10∷DTA and wild type animals at P0. 