The latter action is particularly powerful in brain slices of certain regions. The latter action is particularly powerful in brain slices of certain regions. The latter action is particularly powerful in brain slices of certain regions. Three of them responded to ADPβS or ADP by inhibition of the M-current. Hence, of a total of 20 pyramidal cells tested with ADPβS, in 18 the M-type K+ channel coupled to the P2Y1 receptor and in two it did not but still coupled to mGluR1.Full concentration-inhibition curves for ADPβS were obtained in three neurons using voltage ramps to determine I-V curves in the presence of incremental concentrations of agonist (Fig. As indicated in the protocol used for these experiments (see legend to Fig. In three experiments, number of spikes initiated by a 2 s, 80 pA superthreshold pulse was 1.3 ± 0.9 before application of ADPβS and increased to 13.0 ± 1.5 after application. This effect was reversible and was accompanied by an increased input resistance as measured by the voltage responses to hyperpolarizing current injections, as expected (data not shown). Two major mechanisms for Gq/11-mediated M-current inhibition have been described previously in these neurons, both dependent on accelerated hydrolysis of phosphatidyl-4,5-bisphosphate (PIP2): release of Ca2+ from intracellular stores and subsequent activation of channel-bound calmodulin (Cruzblanca et al , 1998; Gamper and Shapiro, 2003) and depletion of membrane PIP2, which is required to maintain channel opening (Suh and Hille, 2002; H. Zhang et al , 2003; Winks et al , 2005). Intracellular mobilization of Ca2+It has been reported previously that the P2Y1 receptor agonist 2-methylthio ATP (2-MeSATP) raises intracellular Ca2+ in interneurons and astrocytes (but not in pyramidal neurons) of hippocampal slices (Kawamura et al , 2004). In hippocampal cultures, conversely, EPSCs similarly modulated by ATP can be recorded, and a P2Y-type response to exogenous or endogenously released ATP persists during adenosine receptor blockade (J. M. Zhang et al , 2003). Independent evidence is available to confirm the presence of P2Y1 receptors on pyramidal neurons, because it has been established recently by single-cell reverse transcription (RT)-PCR analysis on laser-dissected individual neurons that pyramidal cells in the young rat hippocampus strongly express the P2Y1 receptor mRNA (Rodrigues et al , 2005). We conclude, however, that the great majority of the P2Y1 receptors on pyramidal cells must be postsynaptic to afferent neurons, because of the following: (1) in analyses recently reported of rat hippocampal synaptosomes, the P2Y1 receptor protein is abundant and primarily segregates with postsynaptic density protein (Rodrigues et al , 2005); (2) P2Y1 receptor mRNA is clearly expressed in the pyramidal cells, as noted above, confirming that the protein originates within them; and (3) this likewise holds for the M-current channel KCNQ (Kv7) subunits, in which single-cell RT-PCR again showed that their mRNA is also well expressed in the pyramidal cells, and their protein is seen on their somatic membrane and dendrites (Shah et al , 2002) (see also Roche et al , 2002). In these experiments, activation of expressed receptors with ADP also inhibited the N-type Ca2+ current in sympathetic neurons with equal potency (Brown et al , 2000). However, this appears not to apply to the effect of P2Y1 receptors in hippocampal neurons, because ADPβS did not produce a detectable increase in intracellular Ca2+, and M-current inhibition was unaffected by chelating intracellular Ca2+ with BAPTA-AM or by the Ca2+-ATPase inhibitor thapsigargin, which would be expected to deplete intracellular Ca2+ stores. We should first recall that the M-current is now known to play a key role in regulating neuronal firing frequency and excitability in brain neurons (Aiken et al , 1995; Shah et al , 2002 and references therein; Yue and Yaari, 2004; Peters et al , 2005; Shen et al , 2005). It is reasonable to suppose that such concentrations could readily be achieved through breakdown of any released ATP by ectonucleotidases (Zimmermann and Braun, 1996). Neurons were superfused (20-25 ml/min) with an external modified Krebs' solution containing 120 mM NaCl, 3 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 2.5 mM CaCl2,10mM HEPES, 11.1 mM glucose, adjusted to pH 7.3 with NaOH, and 0.5 μM tetrodotoxin (TTX) when using voltage-clamp recording. Then the firing pattern of the neuron was examined by applying four to five pulses of incremental amplitude at 10 s intervals, each pulse being 1 s in duration. Then the firing pattern of the neuron was examined by applying four to five pulses of incremental amplitude at 10 s intervals, each pulse being 1 s in duration. They were washed (three times for 5 min) with PBS solution; a PBS-based blocking solution containing 5% normal goat serum and 0.1% Triton X-100 was then applied for 1 h. Then incubations at 4°C were performed in the culture dishes for 24 h with the primary antibodies; i.e., with goat anti-neurogranin antibody (1:100 dilution; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA), or with mouse anti-neurofilament 200 (NF-200) (1:200 dilution; Sigma, St. Louis, MO) in the same blocking solution. The cultures were then washed with PBS (three times for 5 min), and the respective secondary antibody was applied in the blocking solution for 2 h at 25°C. To examine this, we selected rat hippocampal pyramidal neurons. The fluorescence ratio images were used to track changes in intracellular Ca2+ of the designated region of interest inside the cells. It also reduced the outward rectification of the I-V curve positive to ‒70 mV [an additional feature of M-current inhibition (Brown and Adams, 1980)] but had no significant effect on membrane currents negative to ‒70 mV (Fig. Neither ADP nor ADPβS produced any additional inward current in the presence of XE991, indicating that their effect was solely the result of M-current inhibition.The absence of any response to ADP or ADPβS in the presence of XE991 (Fig. 3) or at potentials negative to ‒70 mV (Fig. We therefore tested whether M-currents in the cultured neurons that we selected for the above experiments were also inhibited by the selective group 1 mGluR agonist DHPG (10 μM) (Schoepp et al , 1994). 