Stimuli were presented at the center of the video monitor. The fixation target was positioned to minimize the eccentricity of the stimulus as a whole. The fixation target was positioned to minimize the eccentricity of the stimulus as a whole. The fixation target was positioned to minimize the eccentricity of the stimulus as a whole. The fixation target was positioned to minimize the eccentricity of the stimulus as a whole. For corner stimuli, one corner of the square was centered on the CRF and the square moved in one of the four global directions (again the beginning position was the same for all four directions). The dots were of the same luminance as the contour and had the same velocity as the local motion of that contour. Dot density was ~3 dots per square degree. The “missing” degree comes from the widths (0.5 °) of the orthogonal contours. In addition, we also recorded responses from a subset of neurons to intact squares (i.e. In addition, we also recorded responses from a subset of neurons to intact squares (i.e. In addition, we also recorded responses from a subset of neurons to intact squares (i.e. For the other two monkeys, eye positions were sampled at 60 Hz using an infrared video-based tracking system (Iscan, Burlington, MA). Action potentials that crossed a magnitude threshold and had stable waveforms but did not meet the criteria for a single-unit were grouped together and classified as “multi-unit”.Data analysisScreening criteriaAs noted above, our control stimulus corresponded to the portion of our contour stimulus that distinguished the local motion of the contour within the CRF from the global motion of the square. Accordingly, if neurons responded to this control stimulus, we assumed that this key portion of the surround stimulus intruded into the CRF, else we assumed that it did not. Second, we compared “responses” to the control stimuli that corresponded to the contour stimuli with the same local motions within the CRF. Second, we compared “responses” to the control stimuli that corresponded to the contour stimuli with the same local motions within the CRF. There were two such comparisons. There were two such comparisons. To illustrate, for the example in Figure 3C, the activity seen in the upper-left PSTH was compared with that seen in upper-right PSTH, and the activity seen in the lower-left PSTH was compared with that seen in the lower-right PSTH. To illustrate, for the example in Figure 3C, the activity seen in the upper-left PSTH was compared with that seen in upper-right PSTH, and the activity seen in the lower-left PSTH was compared with that seen in the lower-right PSTH. To illustrate, for the example in Figure 3C, the activity seen in the upper-left PSTH was compared with that seen in upper-right PSTH, and the activity seen in the lower-left PSTH was compared with that seen in the lower-right PSTH. The PP direction is defined as the global direction that shares the same local motion (i.e. The PP direction is defined as the global direction that shares the same local motion (i.e. The PP direction is defined as the global direction that shares the same local motion (i.e. of the four global directions) that yielded the largest response, not to the overall preferred direction (see below). For each pair of sampled responses, we subtracted the response to the PP direction from that to the P direction. For each pair of sampled responses, we subtracted the response to the PP direction from that to the P direction. Allman et al , 1985; Bradley and Andersen, 1998; Tanaka et al , 1986; Xiao et al , 1997). the “contour stimulus”, Figure 1A), surround modulation within area MT was most often “integrative” (Huang et al , 2007): responses were larger when the surround portion of stimulus moved in a “preferred” direction than when it moved in less preferred direction. Due to the “aperture problem” (Wallach, 1935; Wuerger et al , 1996; Marr and Ullman, 1981; Adelson and Movshon, 1982), the local motion (i.e. Due to the “aperture problem” (Wallach, 1935; Wuerger et al , 1996; Marr and Ullman, 1981; Adelson and Movshon, 1982), the local motion (i.e. Due to the “aperture problem” (Wallach, 1935; Wuerger et al , 1996; Marr and Ullman, 1981; Adelson and Movshon, 1982), the local motion (i.e. Due to the “aperture problem” (Wallach, 1935; Wuerger et al , 1996; Marr and Ullman, 1981; Adelson and Movshon, 1982), the local motion (i.e. Accordingly, the PP direction is up and to the right. Accordingly, the PP direction is up and to the right. We used the Corner Preferred Direction to define our “Global Prediction”, which is the reference point for maximum integrative modulation. We used the Corner Preferred Direction to define our “Global Prediction”, which is the reference point for maximum integrative modulation. Instead, the Contour Preferred Direction is tilted towards the Global Prediction, thereby indicating integrative modulation. However, unlike the example in Figure 3, this neuron responded (weakly but significantly) to control stimuli (Figure 4C). However, unlike the example in Figure 3, this neuron responded (weakly but significantly) to control stimuli (Figure 4C). However, unlike the example in Figure 3, this neuron responded (weakly but significantly) to control stimuli (Figure 4C). However, unlike the example in Figure 3, this neuron responded (weakly but significantly) to control stimuli (Figure 4C). However, unlike the example in Figure 3, this neuron responded (weakly but significantly) to control stimuli (Figure 4C). However, unlike the example in Figure 3, this neuron responded (weakly but significantly) to control stimuli (Figure 4C). Movshon, Adelson, Gizzi and Newsome, 1985; Albright and Stoner, 1992; Thiele and Stoner, 2003) thereby overcoming the directional ambiguity of the individual gratings. These neurons were composed of 97 no-control response neurons and 111 control-response neurons. These neurons were composed of 97 no-control response neurons and 111 control-response neurons. Eight-eight percent of these “non-linear” neurons (i.e. Eight-eight percent of these “non-linear” neurons (i.e. Characterizing the directional tuning of surround modulationThe above analysis was restricted to examination of responses to the P and PP directions of global motion. The second angle is θ, which is the angular difference between the Global Prediction and the Local Prediction. The CMI varies linearly from −1 (maximum antagonism, in which case ϕ is equal to −θ) to 1 (maximum integration, in which case ϕ is equal to θ). The CMI varies linearly from −1 (maximum antagonism, in which case ϕ is equal to −θ) to 1 (maximum integration, in which case ϕ is equal to θ). Positive and negative ϕs indicate integrative and antagonistic modulation, respectively. The points that lie close to the top diagonal line (i.e. Participants gave informed consent, and all procedures were in accordance with international standards (Declaration of Helsinki) and National Institutes of Health guidelines. Since, however, the no-control response neurons correspond to those studied by us previously (Huang et al , 2007), we also offer a separate analysis of that group to allow comparison. Since, however, the no-control response neurons correspond to those studied by us previously (Huang et al , 2007), we also offer a separate analysis of that group to allow comparison. Since, however, the no-control response neurons correspond to those studied by us previously (Huang et al , 2007), we also offer a separate analysis of that group to allow comparison. Since, however, the no-control response neurons correspond to those studied by us previously (Huang et al , 2007), we also offer a separate analysis of that group to allow comparison. Shiffrar et al , 1995; McDermott et al , 2001) is selective. Like the dots of the dot stimuli, these bars (including their terminators) had the same velocity as the local motion of the CRF contour in the intact square stimuli. The resultant CMI was 0.03.The pattern of responses seen for this neuron mirrors that seen across the 57 neurons tested with bar and contour stimuli and which had interpretable modulation (70 neurons were tested in total). The resultant CMI was 0.03.The pattern of responses seen for this neuron mirrors that seen across the 57 neurons tested with bar and contour stimuli and which had interpretable modulation (70 neurons were tested in total). The resultant CMI was 0.03.The pattern of responses seen for this neuron mirrors that seen across the 57 neurons tested with bar and contour stimuli and which had interpretable modulation (70 neurons were tested in total). The resultant CMI was 0.03.The pattern of responses seen for this neuron mirrors that seen across the 57 neurons tested with bar and contour stimuli and which had interpretable modulation (70 neurons were tested in total). Among the 70 neurons tested with bar stimuli, we tested 49 neurons with bar-control stimuli. We tested two hypotheses. We tested two hypotheses. Although neither of the above hypotheses was supported by the short-bar data, the sample size was too small to confidently avoid a type II error. To detect a CMI deviation from zero (i.e. Somers et al  (1998) have shown that a simple circuit incorporating known patterns of connectivity can account for such contrast-dependent effects in area V1.We developed a simple neural network model that reproduces the relationship between firing rate and surround modulation discovered in this study. Somers et al  (1998) have shown that a simple circuit incorporating known patterns of connectivity can account for such contrast-dependent effects in area V1.We developed a simple neural network model that reproduces the relationship between firing rate and surround modulation discovered in this study. Somers et al  (1998) have shown that a simple circuit incorporating known patterns of connectivity can account for such contrast-dependent effects in area V1.We developed a simple neural network model that reproduces the relationship between firing rate and surround modulation discovered in this study. Somers et al  (1998) have shown that a simple circuit incorporating known patterns of connectivity can account for such contrast-dependent effects in area V1.We developed a simple neural network model that reproduces the relationship between firing rate and surround modulation discovered in this study. Somers et al  (1998) have shown that a simple circuit incorporating known patterns of connectivity can account for such contrast-dependent effects in area V1.We developed a simple neural network model that reproduces the relationship between firing rate and surround modulation discovered in this study. This model also reproduces the contrast-dependent modulation observed by Pack et al  (2005). A key assumption, consistent with the model of Somers et al  (1998), is that lateral inhibition grows faster than lateral excitation as the strength of feedforward input grows. In other words, input strength shifts the balance between directionally-tuned lateral excitation and inhibition, thus determining both the strength and the “sign” (i.e. As a result of this dependency, facilitation and integration yield to suppression and antagonism as the strength of the input increases. First, lateral excitation is mediated directly by connections between excitatory neurons, whereas lateral inhibition is mediated indirectly via inhibitory interneurons. We have assumed that the differences in firing rate we have observed are, on average, monotonically related to the strength of the feedforward input provided to both excitatory and inhibitory neurons. Base is the baseline firing rate and was set to 0 and 12 for excitatory and inhibitory neurons, respectively. Accordingly, the cue was centered over either one of the corners (corner stimuli) or one of the sides of the square (contour, dot, short-bar, and long-bar stimuli). Consistent with experimental findings (Connors et al , 1982; McCormick et al , 1985; Nowak et al , 2003), these parameters impart higher maximum firing rates and larger maximum gains (i.e. Consistent with experimental findings (Connors et al , 1982; McCormick et al , 1985; Nowak et al , 2003), these parameters impart higher maximum firing rates and larger maximum gains (i.e. Consistent with experimental findings (Connors et al , 1982; McCormick et al , 1985; Nowak et al , 2003), these parameters impart higher maximum firing rates and larger maximum gains (i.e. It is interesting to note that other groups have also invoked untuned cortical inhibition but have done so based on quite different stimulus-tuning and contrast-invariance arguments (e.g. relative to fixation) in each block of 20 trials was fixed. up and to the left) or in the PP direction (i.e. up and to the left) or in the PP direction (i.e. up and to the left) or in the PP direction (i.e. The corner or side of the square that was cued was varied across blocks of trials. Increasing the input strength slightly (40 spikes/s maximum V1 input) yields integrative modulation that is somewhat smaller than that seen for the lowest level of input. Allman et al , 1985a; Bradley and Andersen, 1998; Tanaka et al , 1986; Xiao et al , 1997). Surround modulation matched perceptual interpretation (assayed in humans) under some conditions but not others. This eccentricity was chosen to be representative of receptive field centers of our neuronal sample. Their findings were moreover consistent with previous evidence that area MT underlies the selective perceptual integration/segmentation of moving features (Stoner and Albright, 1992; Thiele and Stoner, 2003; Duncan et al , 2000). After cue offset, stimuli remained static for 100 ms and then moved in one of the four global directions (45, 135, 225 and 315°) for 500 ms, after which they disappeared. After cue offset, stimuli remained static for 100 ms and then moved in one of the four global directions (45, 135, 225 and 315°) for 500 ms, after which they disappeared. These simple principles appear insufficient, however, to account for the fact that perceptual interactions between moving features can, under many conditions, be rather sophisticated (e.g. Stoner et al , 1990; Duncan et al , 2000; Shiffrar et al , 1995). It may be that our findings (and our model) capture the behavior of area MT only when attention is withdrawn. The finding that attention changes the receptive field profiles of area MT neurons is consistent with such speculation (Womelsdorf et al , 2006).Attention has been previously implicated in both motion contrast and motion capture. The finding that attention changes the receptive field profiles of area MT neurons is consistent with such speculation (Womelsdorf et al , 2006).Attention has been previously implicated in both motion contrast and motion capture. This decrease in directional interaction agrees with the psychophysical results of Chen et al  (2005) who found that attending to one of two superimposed moving stimuli, reduced repulsion (i.e. This decrease in directional interaction agrees with the psychophysical results of Chen et al  (2005) who found that attending to one of two superimposed moving stimuli, reduced repulsion (i.e. This decrease in directional interaction agrees with the psychophysical results of Chen et al  (2005) who found that attending to one of two superimposed moving stimuli, reduced repulsion (i.e. This decrease in directional interaction agrees with the psychophysical results of Chen et al  (2005) who found that attending to one of two superimposed moving stimuli, reduced repulsion (i.e. This decrease in directional interaction agrees with the psychophysical results of Chen et al  (2005) who found that attending to one of two superimposed moving stimuli, reduced repulsion (i.e. This decrease in directional interaction agrees with the psychophysical results of Chen et al  (2005) who found that attending to one of two superimposed moving stimuli, reduced repulsion (i.e. The role of attention in our findings thus remains unclear.If the perceptions of our monkeys were in fact the same as our human subjects, this would suggest that MT does not underlie the perception of these stimuli. Given previous evidence that macaque monkeys perceptually segment and integrate moving features similarly to humans (Thiele and Stoner, 2003; Zivotofsky et al  2005), we think that possibility unlikely. Following fixation offset, a polar coordinate (a 10° diameter circle with angular markings) was displayed. If a subject was not satisfied with their report for any reason, they could press a different key and repeat the trial. 20 trials per block times 8 blocks). For corner stimuli, the motion within the cued region was the same as the global motion (i.e. Data from all subjects were pooled together and population probability distributions were computed. Procedure for surgical preparation, behavioral training, and electrophysiological recording were routine and similar to those described previously (Duncan et al , 2000; Krekelberg and Albright, 2005). Procedure for surgical preparation, behavioral training, and electrophysiological recording were routine and similar to those described previously (Duncan et al , 2000; Krekelberg and Albright, 2005). Procedure for surgical preparation, behavioral training, and electrophysiological recording were routine and similar to those described previously (Duncan et al , 2000; Krekelberg and Albright, 2005). The output of the video monitor was measured with a PR650 photometer (Photo-Research, Chatsworth, CA). The gratings were viewed through an invisible circular aperture with a diameter of 6° centered on the CRF. 