The lack of involvement of POLβ and XRCC1 in 5-FU responsiveness is striking given their prominent role in the later steps of BER. Conversely, a strain deficient in APN1, the major abasic endonuclease of budding yeast, was exquisitely sensitive to 5-FU compared to a wild-type strain [54], implying that the ability to process AP sites in yeast (and mammalian cells, see above) is crucial for 5-FU resistance. Intriguingly, a rad27 null strain of S. cerevisiae was extremely resistant to 5-FU [54], which parallels the observation that Pol β-/- MEFs are resistant to FdUrd [50]. Nonetheless, Fischer et al  showed at least in HeLa cells that siRNA against UNG2 conferred resistance to FdUrd [71], offering evidence in support of the futile cycling model.The prediction of the BER futile cycling model is that restraining UDG-initiated BER would protect against the toxicity of TS inhibition. To our knowledge, no studies have simultaneously manipulated UDG and dUTPase activity in mammalian cells to test whether tolerance of genomic uracil occurs as a means of developing resistance to TS inhibitors. The second step of MMR involves recognition of the bound MutSα by a second heterodimer (MLH1:PMS2, also known as MutLα). It remains debated as to the relative contribution of each of these cellular targets to the anti-tumor activity and side effects seen in patients. However, from the limited biochemical evidence available, FdUTP is incorporated opposite adenine. This review will focus on the DNA repair processes associated with responding to 5-FU in chromosomal DNA, a topic that has received comparatively little attention until recently. In particular, an early report offered promise that MSI-H patients might selectively benefit from 5-FU treatment [82]. In particular, an early report offered promise that MSI-H patients might selectively benefit from 5-FU treatment [82]. In particular, an early report offered promise that MSI-H patients might selectively benefit from 5-FU treatment [82]. BER status was not simultaneously examined in any of these clinical studies. The PI3K-like kinases, ATM (ataxia telangiectasia-mutated) and ATR (ATM-related), are central mediators in the response to DNA damage during S-phase [90], and their protein substrates number over 700 [91]. Repair pathways for DNA DSBs are worth mentioning because of the studies cited earlier that identified associations between strand breaks and the lethality of TS inhibitors. Third, there are interesting links among S-phase checkpoint signaling and the HR machinery. Evidence clearly indicates that products of 5-FU metabolism can affect intracellular nucleotide pools, and ultimately lead to the incorporation of “false” bases, i.e. Because 5-FU is a structural analog of uracil and thymine, many of the enzymes that participate in uracil or thymine metabolism also effectively metabolize 5-FU, topics that have been extensively studied and previously reviewed [10]. To date, the pathways that appear most relevant in determining 5-FU outcome are BER and MMR (summarized in Table 1). As the factors that are most critical in determining 5-FU responsiveness become identified, novel agents can be designed to selectively inactivate or enhance these key components. As the factors that are most critical in determining 5-FU responsiveness become identified, novel agents can be designed to selectively inactivate or enhance these key components. Such information will become crucial as new generations of inhibitors enter the clinic and are used in combination therapies with the established chemotherapeutics that damage DNA. Such information will become crucial as new generations of inhibitors enter the clinic and are used in combination therapies with the established chemotherapeutics that damage DNA. Such information will become crucial as new generations of inhibitors enter the clinic and are used in combination therapies with the established chemotherapeutics that damage DNA. Thymidine phosphorylase can also salvage 5-FU into the deoxynucleoside, FdUrd. The enzyme dUTP pyrophosphatase (dUTPase) performs an absolutely essential function to prevent genomic uracil incorporation by catalyzing the hydrolysis of dUTP into dUMP (Figure 2); E. coli and S. cerevisiae lacking dUTPase are inviable [11,12]. First, dUMP accumulates, resulting in a higher intracellular concentration of dUTP and FdUTP, which can overwhelm dUTPase and become available for incorporation into the genome by DNA polymerases. Loss of this feedback inhibition presumably increases the conversion of FdUrd to FdUMP by TK and the conversion of FUDP to FdUDP by RNR. This review will focus on more recent studies that have examined the repair machinery involved in the cellular responses to 5-FU once inserted into DNA. Today, 5-FU is widely used in the treatment of solid tumors, including of the breast, gastrointestinal system (colon, rectum, anus, esophagus, pancreas and stomach), head and neck, and ovary [5]. Today, 5-FU is widely used in the treatment of solid tumors, including of the breast, gastrointestinal system (colon, rectum, anus, esophagus, pancreas and stomach), head and neck, and ovary [5]. hydrolytic deamination of cytosine (giving rise to U:G pairs) and incorporation of dUMP during replication (generating U:A pairs), reviewed elsewhere in detail [29]. Briefly, the UNG genetic locus encodes mitochondrial (UNG1) and nuclear (UNG2) forms of UDGs, with UNG2 appearing to account for the bulk of cellular UDG activity [29]. In this study, both the bacterial and human (presumably UNG2) UDG was found to excise 5-FU, albeit with slightly less efficiency than uracil, from plasmid substrates harboring multiple tritium-labeled base lesions. In the case of MBD4, this excision function is specific for 5-FU opposite guanine, a pairing con figuration for which there is no obvious mechanism of formation as will be discussed below (see Section 4.1). Most notably, 5-FU is routinely employed in the management of colorectal cancer via one of two FDA-approved first line combinatorial chemotherapy regimes, abbreviated FOLFOX and FOLFIRI, which involve intravenous administration of the fluorinated base analog (Figure 1). Yet surprisingly, several investigations have concluded using various approaches that UNG does not influence the cytotoxicity of 5-FU [37-39]. In addition, defects in MMR are associated with hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), i.e. cancers characterized by high microsatellite instability (MSI-H) [43], and mutations in the MBD4 gene have been reported in human colorectal cancers found to exhibit MSI-H [44-46]. Since TDG-deficient cells have not yet been reported [31], it is impossible to state with certainty whether this glycosylase influences the cellular response to 5-FU. 