These methods require tissue harvesting and thus are inherently invasive, ex vivo techniques. Altogether, these results demonstrate proof-of-principle for the pro-ORCA concept, showing that light-induced prodrug activation correlates with MRI signal in vitro (Figure 2D). Control over their hydrolysis rate is predictable and tunable using rational structural modifications. Using these 3 linkers, 6 different MMs were synthesized: DOX-S-MM; DOX-M-MM60; DOX-F-MM; chex-S-MM; chex-M-MM; and chex-F-MM where S, M, and F correspond to the linker structure: slow, medium and fast, respectively (Scheme 2A, see SI for synthetic details). Validating our prodrug linker design, the toxicity toward both cell lines followed the same trend: DOX-F > DOX-M > DOX-S. It should be noted that intratumoral drug delivery is a clinically-viable strategy for cancer therapy;82–85 ~200 ongoing clinical trials leverage this method of administration. It should be noted that intratumoral drug delivery is a clinically-viable strategy for cancer therapy;82–85 ~200 ongoing clinical trials leverage this method of administration. Moreover, intratumoral administration of BASPs has not been demonstrated before. Inversion of image intensity was performed for subsequent analysis in order to aid visualization. It is, however, difficult to directly compare F and M, as the fluorescence of DOX is susceptible to alteration by several biological processes.86,87 Nonetheless, these results support the fact that T2 MRI signal changes induced by pro-ORCA activation correlate with DOX prodrug activation in this system, establishing the first example of controlled nitroxide release for correlation of drug release in vivo. Regarding the latter, real-time monitoring of drug release via changes in T2 MRI signals within a tumor was demonstrated. Theranostic agents — systems that simultaneously provide therapeutic and diagnostic modalities — are promising tools for personalized medicine.1–4 These agents can, in principle, afford molecular insights into disease states and non-invasively report in real-time on the accumulation, release, and efficacy of therapeutic agents, thereby enabling real-time therapeutic selection.3,5,6 Since their multifunctional requirements are difficult to achieve with small molecules, theranostic systems are often based on nanoscale materials, which themselves possess useful properties such as controllable size and shape, high loading/multiplexing capability, tunable circulation half-life, predictable biodistribution, and targeted tissue accumulation.7–9 Indeed, a plethora of theranostic agents based on nanoscale material scaffolds (e.g., liposomes, micelles, dendrimers, polymers, etc.) 2 mm slices were imaged through the samples with the field of view of 5 × 5 cm; and, the data matrices were 256 × 256 points. For cells that were imaged by MRI, the media was removed. Cell lines were authenticated by short tandem repeat DNA profiling and were confirmed to be mycoplasma negative, using the MycoAlert Mycoplasma Testing Kit (Lonza). The media was then replaced with fresh media containing BASPs at various concentrations. Cells were incubated for 2 h with DOX-PC or chex-PC at various concentrations. Cells were then either exposed to UV for 30 min (+UV) or not (-UV). Animal usage.All animal studies were conducted under federal, state, and local guidelines in accordance with the Public Health Service Policy on Humane Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and the National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals with approval from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Committee on Animal Care. IVIS imaging was performed at the David H Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research at MIT. IVIS imaging was performed at the David H Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research at MIT. Tumor growth was monitored for 2–4 weeks until appropriate cumulative diameters (~ 1 cm, measured by a digital caliper) were achieved. Tumor region was localized in focal spot of surface coil, with animal restrained in order to allow unhindered breathing while minimizing motion around the hind leg and tumor. Images were analyzed using either ImageJ or custom routines written in Matlab (Mathworks, Natick, MA). Photocleavable linkers based on ortho-nitrobenzyl (ONB) derivatives have been widely used in the context of protecting group chemistry, drug delivery, and materials applications,73–79 and while such linkers may have translational limitations, they offer powerful research tools for triggering specific, light-induced biological responses. A significant challenge in the field of polymer-based prodrugs, including BASP prodrugs, lies in the real-time monitoring of prodrug activation, i.e., polymer-bound prodrug versus free drug, in biological systems. A significant challenge in the field of polymer-based prodrugs, including BASP prodrugs, lies in the real-time monitoring of prodrug activation, i.e., polymer-bound prodrug versus free drug, in biological systems. Excess DOX-PC was then removed by media washing, and the cells were exposed to 365 nm light for 30 min. Prodrug activation kinetics can significantly impact therapeutic outcomes: activation that occurs too quickly or too slowly can be detrimental.62 Most prodrugs do not provide facile spectroscopic readouts upon activation; thus, liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS-MS) or inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) are traditionally used to quantify prodrug versus free drug in tissue samples of interest. Cells were incubated with PC2 (17 mg PC2/mL; 107 µM of conjugated DOX) following the same procedure as described above. Upon irradiation, a diminished T2 MRI signal was observed as the molar transverse relaxivity of the nitroxide decreases by ~30-fold upon release (Table 1, r2 of water-soluble chex analogue 3-CP = 0.17 mM−1s−1 compared to PC2, which has a per-chex r2 of 4.91 mM−1s−1). 