These results provide evidence suggesting that PKD-dependent fission activity regulates the formation of TGN to cell surface specific transport carriers. No alterations in the polarity index of axonal proteins such as L1 and VAMP2 were detected after expression of PKD1-KD; both proteins display a non-polarized distribution localizing to axons and dendrites (Table I; Suppl. At later time points (Suppl. At later time points (Suppl. At later time points (Suppl. RNAi suppression of PKD1 causes missorting of LRPTo further test the involvement of PKD1 in the trafficking of dendritic membrane proteins, we generated a plasmid harboring both a PKD1 hairpin RNAi and a GFP cDNA (i.e. The silencing effect of this plasmid was confirmed by Western blotting of CHO cells and primary neuronal cultures (Suppl. TfR-GFP expressing pyramidal neurons, selected using wide field epifluorescence, were imaged with TIRFM. Examples of different types of fusion events are shown in Figure 6. Because this phenomenon is paralleled by Golgi tubulation (Lijedahl et al , 2001; Prigozhina and Waterman-Storer, 2004; Bossard et al , 2007; this study), and because expression of constitutive active mutants of PKD 1-3 induces Golgi vesiculation/fragmentation, it has been proposed that PKD has a role in the regulation of fission of exocytic carriers from the TGN to the cell surface (Yeaman et al , 2004; Diaz-Añel and Malhotra, 2005; Bossard et al , 2007). In fact, after PKD1 depletion, these two dendritic membrane proteins colocalize with vesicles containing VAMP2, an axonal membrane protein trafficking to axons and dendrites, but that is selectively retained at the axonal membrane (Sampo et al , 2003). Accordingly, after expression of PKD1-KD, spectral confocal microscopy revealed extensive colocalization of LRP and VAMP2 in vesicle-like structures emerging from the Golgi and entering neuritic processes. Interestingly, no missorting was detected after expression of P155G, a PKD1-KD mutant unable to bind DAG, and hence lacking Golgi localization. Protein kinase D1 (PKD1) is a member of a family of dyacylglycerol (DAG)-binding Ser/Thr kinases (Nishikawa et al , 1997; Rykx et al , 2003; Rozengurt et al , 2005). PDZ proteins have been implicated in delaying the rate of endocytosis of at least some population of endocytic vesicles (e.g. Finally, our results show that disruption of the polarized trafficking of LRP or TfR after PKD1 suppression/inactivation is an early event that occurs in the absence of detectable decreases in the steady state intracellular distribution of LRP4 or TfR and precedes alterations in dendritic morphology. neurotrophin or neurotransmitters receptors) would occur, thereby halting at a later time point dendritic development and maintenance. neurotrophin or neurotransmitters receptors) would occur, thereby halting at a later time point dendritic development and maintenance. neurotrophin or neurotransmitters receptors) would occur, thereby halting at a later time point dendritic development and maintenance. neurotrophin or neurotransmitters receptors) would occur, thereby halting at a later time point dendritic development and maintenance. neurotrophin or neurotransmitters receptors) would occur, thereby halting at a later time point dendritic development and maintenance. neurotrophin or neurotransmitters receptors) would occur, thereby halting at a later time point dendritic development and maintenance. Supplemental Table II 5′-GGTTCTGGACAGTTCGGAATAAGCTTATTCCGAACTGTCCAGAACCCTTTTTTG and 5′-AATTCAAAAAGGGTTCTGGACAGTTCGGAATAAGCTTATTCCGAACTGTCCAGAACC were used as targeting sequences following the procedures described by Chuang et al , (2005). PKD1-WT S916A and PKD1-KD S916E were constructed as described by Sánchez-Ruiloba et al , (2006). Culture, transfection and immunofluorescenceNeuronal cultures form embryonic rat hippocampi were prepared as described (Kunda et al , 2001; Rosso et al , 2004; Chuang et al , 2005). Transient transfection of cultured neurons was performed as described (Kunda et al , 2001; Rosso et al , 2004; Chuang et al , 2005), and the constructs used at a concentration of 2 μg/ul unless otherwise stated. First, an average background fluorescence value was determined from several regions containing unlabeled neurites then subtracted from the whole image. First, an average background fluorescence value was determined from several regions containing unlabeled neurites then subtracted from the whole image. In order to quantify the fluorescence in axons and dendrites, several 1-pixel wide 100 μm lines were drawn on randomly selected portions of the axon and the dendrites (6–10 lines each) using the MAP2 or tau signals as a guide, then these regions were transferred to the HA-mLRP4 or GFP-TfR fluorescence image and the average fluorescence for each region was calculated. PKD1-3 binds primarily to the trans-Golgi network (TGN) in a DAG-dependent manner (Baron & Malhotra, 2000; Maeda et al , 2001) and PKD bound to the TGN is activated by PKCη (Diaz-Añel & Malhotra, 2005). PKD1 is predominantly expressed in cultured hippocampal cellsThe experiments described in this study were carried out using neuronal cultures prepared from the embryonic hippocampus, because this model system has been extensively used for studies of neuronal membrane protein trafficking (Craig & Banker, 1994; Horton & Ehlers, 2003). Most PKD studies have been carried out in non-neuronal cells, and therefore the isoform(s) expressed by neurons are largely unknown. This is potentially important, since PKDs have been implicated in the selective regulation of basolateral protein trafficking in polarized epithelial cells (Yeaman et al , 2004).Since previous studies have shown that in non-neuronal cells inhibition of PKD at the TGN blocks the anterograde membrane transport of the temperature-sensitive ts045 mutant of vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein (VSVG) fused to GFP (Yeaman et al , 2004; Prigozhina & Waterman-Storer, 2004), we first examined whether or not the anterograde membrane trafficking of TfR-GFP was reduced after expression of the kinase inactive mutant (kinase dead, KD) of PKD1 (PKD1-KD). Thus, when Golgi morphology was analyzed with an antibody against GM130, a marker of the cis-Golgi, or after ectopic expression of GalT2-GFP, a marker of the TGN, no differences were detected between control (non-transfected) and neurons transfected with PKD1-WT or their mutants, either PKD1-KD or a constitutive active one (CA) (Figure 2). Overexpression of PKCη over activates the fission reaction leading to Golgi fragmentation and this process is inhibited by expression of PKD1-kinase dead (Diaz-Añel & Malhotra, 2005). However, during the course of these experiments it became evident that expression of PKD1-KD induced a dramatic alteration in the intracellular distribution of TfR-GFP. 