[12,19,20] Currently, HER2 FISH serves as a gold standard to determine HER2 status because it can provide relatively objective evaluation of HER2 gene amplification in a quantitative manner. Several large clinical trials have reported pCR rates range from 40% to 50% in HER2-positive breast cancer patients who received anti-HER2 NAC. [28–32,21] In current study, we have also discovered HER2 IHC DIA connectivity as a novel predictive factor for pCR to anti-HER2 NAC, suggesting it may be necessary to objectively assess HER2 IHCs using digital imaging analysis tools, especially with current widespread availability of WSIs. Currently, HER2 FISH serves as a gold standard to determine HER2 status because it can provide relatively objective evaluation of HER2 gene amplification in a quantitative manner. Case selectionThe study cohort included 153 HER2-positive invasive breast carcinoma patients treated with anti-HER2 neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) and follow-up surgical resection (91 lumpectomy specimens and 62 mastectomy specimens) within a study period between January 2014 and January 2018 from The Ohio State University (n=82) and Emory University (n=71). This study was approved by the Ohio State University and Emory University institutional Research Board. For NAC, the majority of patients received four cycles of AC (doxorubicin + cyclophosphamide) together with paclitaxel or docetaxel followed by trastuzumab. Pathologic complete response (pCR) was defined as no detectable residual invasive tumor in breast tissue and absence of lymph nodal metastasis. Whole slide images (WSIs) were stored in a centralized server located at The Ohio State University’s campus. Clinical and pathologic characteristics of the study cohortThe clinical and pathologic characteristics from the study cohort of 153 primary HER2-positive invasive breast carcinomas treated with anti-HER2 NAC and excision were summarized in table 1. HER2 status is usually assessed by immunohistochemistry (IHC) for HER2 protein expression and/or by in situ hybridization (ISH) for HER2 gene amplification. First, the associations of NAC response with clinical and pathologic variables and HER2 DIA connectivity were examined using univariate analysis (Table 2). Furthermore, the pCR cases also showed significantly greater median HER2 DIA connectivity than the cases with residual tumor (0.88 vs. 0.75, p < 0.001) (Table 2).Next, a multivariable logistic regression model was fit by a backward variable selection method with an alpha =.20 removal criteria to further analyze all variables with p < 0.05 in the univariate analysis. [9] HER2 IHCs are evaluated non-quantitatively by pathologists to give a score from 0 to 3+ based on membranous staining of HER2 protein and the American Society of Clinical Oncology and the College of American Pathologists (ASCO/CAP) guidelines; however, interobserver variability commonly occurs among pathologists. They should be improved if the sample size was larger.Additionally, we investigated the ability of HER2 DIA connectivity in predicting pCR for patients with HER2 IHC equivocal (2+) results. The HER2 DIA connectivity (mean ± SD: 0.36 ± 0.17) of HER2 IHC equivocal cases without pCR (n=23) was significantly lower than the DIA connectivity (mean ± SD: 0.87 ± 0.06) of cases with pCR (n=7) (p<0.001), suggesting its predictive ability in HER2 IHC equivocal cases. 