The mechanism by which the Cohesin complex regulates expression of EcR-B1 and how the Cohesin complex itself is regulated during development is not yet understood. How does the activation of the UPS system promote pruning? However, current data does not support a role for Highwire, NMNAT or Wnd in axon pruning of MB neurons.38,63,70 Therefore, the identity of the E2/E3 and targets for degradation in the context of MB axon pruning remains unknown. The PI3K-cIII complex was shown to phosphorylate phosphatidylinositol lipids on endocytic membranes to give rise to PI(3)P which subsequently recruits a wide variety of proteins containing an FYVE domain. Likewise, the relationship between the endocytosis mediated dendrite thinning and dendrite severing, which is thought to be initiated by IK239 is not yet resolved. Finding the binding partner of Nrg as well as its source will provide important insights into how cell-cell interactions regulate da pruning. Likewise, a structure function analysis of the required domains in Nrg should provide an insight into the intracellular signaling pathways that inhibit pruning. Interestingly, overexpression of FasII was sufficient to inhibit pruning.79 Furthermore, expression of FasII lacking its intracellular domain or even overexpression of other cell adhesion proteins was sufficient to inhibit axon pruning, suggesting that pruning depends on the destabilization of cell adhesion and not necessarily FasII signaling.79 Remarkably, mutations in dJNK, or overexpression of FasII affected only axon but not dendrite pruning. Therefore, neuron-neuron as well as glia-neuron and epithelial cell-neuron interactions could be instrumental at different stages of remodeling. In the context of da neurons, epidermal cells, and not glia, have been identified to act as the primary phagocytes to clear neuronal debris.83 However, glia in the da system may still play an important role. Because mammalian TOR (mTOR) was shown to be required in axon regeneration following injury in mice,90,91 these findings suggest that regrowth following pruning is not only distinct from initial axon outgrowth but might also share molecular mechanisms with regeneration following injury. Finally, the interactions between neurons and other cells, such as glia, are just beginning to be uncovered. However, recent work has identified IGF-II mRNA-binding protein (Imp) as a regulator of profilin mRNA transport and localization during regrowth.94 Profilin is know to play a major role in actin polymerization,95 suggesting that altering actin dynamics may promote regrowth. Defects in CCAP neurite regrowth and soma size increase during neuronal remodeling have also been observed following perturbations in the insulin signaling pathway.97 An increase in insulin signaling promotes neuronal growth as well as axon branching following pruning. While pruning has been studied in several systems, the subsequent regrowth to mature targets has remained a ‘black box’, most likely because it was assumed to utilize the same molecular mechanisms as initial neurite outgrowth. Switching between Pruning and Regrowth must be Tightly Regulated Is this switch achieved by a changing balance between two competing and contradicting processes? Or is it an active switch between two distinct growth programs? Or is it an active switch between two distinct growth programs? Strengthening this notion is the fact that both steps in remodeling—pruning and regrowth—are regulated by nuclear receptors that in essence function as ligand dependent transcription factors. Strengthening this notion is the fact that both steps in remodeling—pruning and regrowth—are regulated by nuclear receptors that in essence function as ligand dependent transcription factors. Strengthening this notion is the fact that both steps in remodeling—pruning and regrowth—are regulated by nuclear receptors that in essence function as ligand dependent transcription factors. Strengthening this notion is the fact that both steps in remodeling—pruning and regrowth—are regulated by nuclear receptors that in essence function as ligand dependent transcription factors. Neuronal remodeling is an essential step in the formation of the adult nervous system. The recent advances in RNA-seq suggest that advances in this direction are just a matter of time. The recent advances in RNA-seq suggest that advances in this direction are just a matter of time. The recent advances in RNA-seq suggest that advances in this direction are just a matter of time. It is quite apparent that the field of developmental axon pruning and regrowth is still in its infancy. It is quite apparent that the field of developmental axon pruning and regrowth is still in its infancy. It is quite apparent that the field of developmental axon pruning and regrowth is still in its infancy. Therefore, we believe that it is important to study more neuronal systems in Drosophila to allow a more comprehensive comparison that will allow us to highlight genes and pathways that are globally required for neuronal remodeling and those that are specific to the CNS or PNS, to axon versus dendrite or to specific cell types. Finally, the recent discovery that cell adhesion plays a role in axon pruning offers an opportunity to link extracellular signals to changes in cytoskeleton dynamics. We envision that genomic strategies will likely soon be added to the discovery toolbox, due to recent advances in cell isolation and RNA-seq from small quantities of RNA. We envision that genomic strategies will likely soon be added to the discovery toolbox, due to recent advances in cell isolation and RNA-seq from small quantities of RNA. We envision that genomic strategies will likely soon be added to the discovery toolbox, due to recent advances in cell isolation and RNA-seq from small quantities of RNA. We envision that genomic strategies will likely soon be added to the discovery toolbox, due to recent advances in cell isolation and RNA-seq from small quantities of RNA. We envision that genomic strategies will likely soon be added to the discovery toolbox, due to recent advances in cell isolation and RNA-seq from small quantities of RNA. We envision that genomic strategies will likely soon be added to the discovery toolbox, due to recent advances in cell isolation and RNA-seq from small quantities of RNA. We envision that genomic strategies will likely soon be added to the discovery toolbox, due to recent advances in cell isolation and RNA-seq from small quantities of RNA. These neurons begin to regrow their dendritic arbor at about 36 h APF for class I21 and 24 h APF for class IV.21,23 Crustacean cardioactive peptide (CCAP) expressing neurons (called CCAP or Bursicon neurons because they also express the Bursicon peptide) are mostly located in the ventral nerve cord and also undergo massive neuronal remodeling during metamorphosis. Crustacean cardioactive peptide (CCAP) expressing neurons (called CCAP or Bursicon neurons because they also express the Bursicon peptide) are mostly located in the ventral nerve cord and also undergo massive neuronal remodeling during metamorphosis. Drosophila motoneurons (MNs) also undergo extensive remodeling which takes place at different stages of development. In the late embryo/early larva, ectopic connections undergo selective elimination in an activity dependent manner, mediated by repulsive factors.30 During metamorphosis further remodeling of the MN occurs: the elaborate dendritic tree of MN 1–4 is refined via the pruning and regrowth of the dendrites.31 In addition, the connections between the MN and the muscle are remodeled when some MNs eliminate their axons presumably by retraction,32 concomitant with dismantling of synapses.33 Later, MNs form new connections via regrowth.34 In essence, the remodeling of different MNs at different stages of development likely involves distinct mechanisms and therefore warrants a dedicated review due to the complexity of the system. However, the three systems that we have decided to focus on in this article are not a comprehensive list. A comparison between such neurons should provide additional insights into what commits a neuron to remodeling. Neuronal remodeling had also been shown in a variety of vertebrates ranging from mice to humans. For example, large-scale pruning of murine layer V corticospinal axons is responsible for segregating the connections of motor and visual cortical neurons.6 Defects in pruning have been associated with several neurological abnormalities, such as autism, in which it has been hypothesized that there is over-pruning.11 For example, large-scale pruning of murine layer V corticospinal axons is responsible for segregating the connections of motor and visual cortical neurons.6 Defects in pruning have been associated with several neurological abnormalities, such as autism, in which it has been hypothesized that there is over-pruning.11 The loss of MTs precedes axon severing and begins close to the future cut site in the proximal arbor and afterward propagates outward toward more distal branches.39 This destabilization of MTs in proximal dendrites is mediated, at least in part, by Katanin p60-like 1, which belongs to the Katanin family of MT severing proteins.39 So, in theory, the spatial control of da neuron dendrite pruning might be achieved by this initial severing event that divides the cell to arbors that will and will not undergo pruning. Remarkably, in the right culture conditions pupal brains continue to develop and undergo axon pruning in a similar time scale as in vivo. Remarkably, in the right culture conditions pupal brains continue to develop and undergo axon pruning in a similar time scale as in vivo. Ecdysone Signaling is a Major Gatekeeper of Pruning Two lethal alleles mapped to the same gene—Ultraspiracle (usp), the ortholog of retinoic acid receptor.45 USP is part of a heterodimer of nuclear receptors that bind the steroid molting hormone 20-hydroxyecdysone (ecdysone). Two lethal alleles mapped to the same gene—Ultraspiracle (usp), the ortholog of retinoic acid receptor.45 USP is part of a heterodimer of nuclear receptors that bind the steroid molting hormone 20-hydroxyecdysone (ecdysone). Two lethal alleles mapped to the same gene—Ultraspiracle (usp), the ortholog of retinoic acid receptor.45 USP is part of a heterodimer of nuclear receptors that bind the steroid molting hormone 20-hydroxyecdysone (ecdysone). 