This was further validated by a DNA pulldown assay utilizing biotinylated oligonucleotides containing a previously characterized TRE. We have also demonstrated a common pathway in breast and thyroid cancers, which demonstrates the value of this pathway for further understanding the observed epidemiological link between both diseases [10-13]. The Ras/MAPK and JAK2-STAT3 pathways and epithelial characteristics are all features regulated by TRβ in breast cancer that merit further investigation in thyroid cancer. Revealing common features can aid in understanding the metachronous nature of the two diseases. TRβ also exhibits tumor suppressor activity in thyroid cancer [9], a disease with a link to breast cancer. Supp Table 1 Further understanding of either of these tumor types may reveal important insights into the predisposition for the other disease as well as insights into how both tumor types develop. Reciprocal synergies between these tumors may be highly informative. These findings indicate that the T3-TRβ-RUNX2 pathway could be active in breast cancer as well as in thyroid cancer. Unlike in thyroid cells where the dominant thyroid hormone receptor is TRβ, in breast cells TRα expression is robust. These findings demonstrate that the suppressive action of T3 is mediated through TRβ but not TRα and support mechanistic linkage of thyroid hormone control with breast cancer activation and repression as well as provide potential therapeutic targets that are based on selective modifications in thyroid hormone receptor relationships. Specific proteins were detected by immunoblotting with the indicated antibodies (Supplementary Table 2). RNA Extraction and Quantitative Real-Time PCR (qRT-PCR).Total RNA was extracted using RNeasy Plus Kit (Qiagen) according to manufacturer’s protocol. Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP).Binding to RUNX2 chromatin was determined by ChIP-PCR. Cells were lysed in the presence of protease inhibitors (Roche) and chromatin was extracted and sonicated to 200–500 bp in size using a Covaris S220 Focused-ultrasonicator. Complexes were washed extensively, eluted, and incubated at 65°C overnight to reverse cross-links. Fold binding over IgG was determined by qRT-PCR. Fold binding over IgG was determined by qRT-PCR. MyOne T1 Streptavidin beads (Invitrogen) were rinsed twice with binding buffer (20 mM HEPES, 30 mM KCl, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM (NH4)2SO4, 1 mM DTT, 0.2% (v/v) Tween-20, pH 7.6), incubated with 5 ng of biotinylated probe at 4°C for 1 hour, and then washed twice with binding buffer. Statistics.All statistical analyses were performed using GraphPad Prism software. Both TRα and TRβ are both expressed in normal breast tissue [31], necessitating examination of the expression levels for the THRA and THRB genes. Thyroid hormone repression of RUNX2 is driven by TRβ.MCF10A mammary epithelial-like cells and MDA-MB-231 triple negative breast cancer cells were examined to determine whether treatment with T3 can modify RUNX2 expression. T3 treatment significantly decreased RUNX2 mRNA and protein levels in both cell lines after 24 hours (Fig 2 and SFig 1).Unlike in the thyroid cells where we previously characterized the action of T3 on expression of the RUNX2 gene, breast cells express both TRα and TRβ. To evaluate whether one or both TRs can repress RUNX2 expression MDA-MB-231 cells were transiently transfected with vectors that overexpress either TRα or TRβ. Similar results were observed in triple negative MDA-MB-468 cells. 