TGFβ1 and CTT were added to the medium at 5 ng/mL and 100 μg/mL, respectively. Ischemic Limb Surgery and the Intravenous (IV) Injection of Nanogels.Animal surgeries were performed following guidelines approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of The Ohio State University. The ECM degradation also releases matrix-bound angiogenic growth factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor to facilitate vessel formation.14–16 Thus, control of MMP-2 bioactivity will not only delay skeletal muscle degeneration but also promote vessel regeneration. IVIS Imaging for Tracking Nanaogels.To monitor the targeting capability of the PMNG, an in vivo imaging system (IVIS) (Lumina II, PerkinElmer) was used. The total collagen, type I collagen, and type III collagen content were quantified from PSR staining imaged under polarized light. Type I collagen was determined as the yellow-red area in PSR staining under polarized light, and type III collagen was determined as the green area in PSR staining under polarized light. Masson’s trichrome staining was used for liver, lung, and kidney.To perform immunohistochemical staining, deparaffinized tissue sections were blocked with serum and incubated with primary antibodies against F4/80, α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA), or isolectin. Statistical Analyses.Statistical analysis was performed using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with post hoc Tukey test. Statistical Analyses.Statistical analysis was performed using one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with post hoc Tukey test. A representative spectrum shown in Figure 1B exhibited characteristic peaks corresponding to NIPAAm (a), NAS (b), HEMAOHB (g), PAA (d), and MAPEG (e and f). A representative spectrum shown in Figure 1B exhibited characteristic peaks corresponding to NIPAAm (a), NAS (b), HEMAOHB (g), PAA (d), and MAPEG (e and f). A representative spectrum shown in Figure 1B exhibited characteristic peaks corresponding to NIPAAm (a), NAS (b), HEMAOHB (g), PAA (d), and MAPEG (e and f). The calculated composition of each hydrogel was consistent with the feed ratio (Figure 1C). The HEMAOHB component had a degradable and hydrophobic side-chain oligo(β-hydroxybutyrate). Previous studies have demonstrated that platelet membrane (not live prothrombotic platelet) increases nanoparticles’ circulation time.45,53 The platelet membrane also has the innate ability to find injured endothelial cells by binding motifs on the membrane.54,55 Therefore, the platelet membrane-cloaked nanogels can target ischemic tissues. The TEM images of the nanogel (NG) and platelet membrane-cloaked nanogel (PMNG) confirmed the successful cloaking of the platelet membrane (Figure 2A, B). Systemic delivery without targeting capability may lead to CTT distributing to healthy tissue causing deleterious effects. The bovine blood incubated with PBS was used as control. CTT Promoted Endothelial Cell Migration in the TGF^-Rich Environment.Besides acting as a MMP-2 inhibitor, CTT had a positive effect on endothelial cell migration under TGFβ condition existing in the ischemic limbs (Figure 2K,L). CTT Promoted Endothelial Cell Migration in the TGF^-Rich Environment.Besides acting as a MMP-2 inhibitor, CTT had a positive effect on endothelial cell migration under TGFβ condition existing in the ischemic limbs (Figure 2K,L). Nanogels can be administrated by minimally invasive intravenous (IV) injection and specifically accumulate in tissues of interest when designed to have targeting property.29,30 Nanogels based on poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (NIPAAm) and its derivatives have been widely used for drug delivery applications.31–34 These polymers are not only thermosensitive but also highly biocompatible. The cell migration was significantly increased at 24 h (p < 0.01). The nanogels remained predominately in the ischemic hindlimbs after 7, 14, 21, and 28 days of post injection. Notably, the liver and kidney in the PMNG/CTT group had lower fluorescence intensities than those from the healthy mice at both time points (Figure 3D). These results demonstrate that nanogels had minimum off-target effect. These results demonstrate that nanogels had minimum off-target effect. The LCSTs were lower than 37 °C before the degradation of side chain and higher than 37 °C after degradation. First, MMP-2 inhibitors may stimulate the differentiation of fibroblasts into myofibroblasts,24 which are known as the predominant contributor of type I collagen.64 Second, the inhibition of MMP-2 by the delivered CTT may break the local balance of MMP-2 and the TIMPs in the ischemic limbs, leading to overproduction of collagen. In this work, nanogels were also designed to be pH-sensitive with pH sensitivity between 6 and 7. This led to the preservation of ECM (Figure 4), which provides three-dimensional (3D) structural support for skeletal muscle cells to proliferate and differentiate.10 The muscle regeneration can also be attributed to the accelerated angiogenesis. Released CTT Did Not Cause Fibrosis in Liver, Kidney, and Lung.One of the concerns when systemically delivering CTT is that off-targeted CTT may accumulate in the healthy organs and decrease their MMP-2 bioactivity, leading to tissue fibrosis. It is likely resulted from targeting capability of the developed nanogels. Bovine blood was purchased from Quad Five. Monomers with designated feed ratios (NIPAAm/NAS/HEMAOHB/PAA/MAPEG = 50/15/25/5/5, 50/10/25/10/5, or 45/15/25/5/10) were first dissolved in dioxane under nitrogen. BPO (0.2 mol %) was then added, and the mixture was heated at 70 °C for 20 h. Upon completion, the reaction mixture was poured into a large volume of cold hexane to precipitate the polymer. Regeneration of skeletal muscle and vasculature is crucial to prevent limb amputation.1–4 However, current endovascular and surgical approaches and pharmacological treatments show limited efficacy.3–9 Therefore, superior alternatives to current treatments are critically needed for CLI treatment. After 24 h of culture in an incubator (37 °C, 5% CO2)’ 20 μL of degradation medium was added to 200 μL of culture medium. Fabrication of Nanogels.Nanogels based on the synthesized hydrogels were fabricated following an adapted procedure.44 The hydrogel was first dissolved in THF at a concentration of 0.1% w/v. The pH sensitivity of the nanogel was tested using dynamic light scattering (DLS) (Malvern Panalytical) under pH 7.4 and 6.5, respectively. The structure of platelet membrane-coated nanogels (abbreviated as PMNG) was examined by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (FEI Tecnai G2 Spirit TEM) after negative staining with uranyl acetate. Testing Cell Uptake of PMNG.Human cardiac microvascular endothelial cells (HMVECs) and bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMMs) were seeded onto glass slides in 24-well plates with a density of 5.0 × 104 cells/well. To image the PMNG, rhodamine-B-labeled CST was conjugated to the PMNG surface. The images were taken by a confocal microscope (Olympus FV 1000). After mixing, 300 μgCTT/mgHydrogel solution was quickly added to a mixture of THF and DPBS with constant ultrasonication for 10 min. At each time point, 1.2 mL of dialysate was collected and the same amount of fresh release medium (PBS) was added. 