Small spiny secondary dendrites were also immunopositive, but large aspiny primary dendrites were only weakly stained. Functionally, the most notable consequence of C-terminal splicing is a difference in calmodulin and kinase regulation, leading to different kinetics of calmodulin and Ca2+ activation of these pumps (Penniston and Enyedi, 1998). 4A), where numerous positive puncta covered somata of pyramidal neurons (Fig. Numerous puncta surrounded unstained somata of pyramidal neurons, especially in layers II/III and V (Fig. At high magnification, pyramidal cell somata were covered by a thin layer of PMCA2-positive/PMCA2a-negative staining, likely representing PMCA2b at the somatic plasma membrane (inset in Fig. These pyramidal neurons were surrounded by a peri-somatic net of puncta double-stained for PMCA2 and PMCA2a. We concluded that PMCA2a concentrated in a subpopulation of inhibitory axon terminals, but not in excitatory terminals. Neuronal somata were immunonegative for PMCA2a, but numerous puncta were double-labeled for PMCA2a and GABA; these could be seen surrounding both GABA-positive and GABA-negative somata (Fig. In many regions of the brain, including hippocampus (Fig. Since visual inspection is inherently subjective and may lead to misinterpretation, we performed quantitative image analysis. To gain further insight into the pattern of colocalization, raw confocal images were analyzed using intensity correlation analysis as described by Li et al  (2004). However, our data are at variance with their conclusion that PMCA2a in hippocampus is enriched in excitatory terminals, and regulates excitatory synaptic transmission. The present work extends these results, demonstrating that a single splice variant is targeted to a single type of presynaptic terminal. Recent experimental studies in model systems have shown that alternative splicing can play a major role in PMCA targeting. In epithelial cells the A-splice-site insert regulates PMCA2 targeting to the apical membrane (Chicka and Strehler, 2003). Those authors showed that the size of the insertion at the A-splice site controls PMCA2 apical targeting, regardless of the C-terminal cassette; a 45-amino-acid insert at this site (the w-form) resulted in apical targeting, whereas smaller inserts resulted in basolateral targeting. Beyond their distinctive content of calcium buffers, it was recently shown that GABA release from FS basket cells is mediated exclusively by P/Q-type VDCCs, whereas GABA release from CCK-positive basket cells is mediated exclusively by N-type VDCC (Hefft and Jonas, 2005). Splice variants of PMCA2 have significantly lower Kd values for Ca2+ that other PMCAs, and therefore can extrude Ca2+ to substantially lower levels than other PMCA isoforms (Elwess et al , 1997). Here, we used immunohistochemistry to investigate the spatial distribution of the “a” variant of PMCA2 (PMCA2a) in the adult rat brain, testing whether this splice variant is targeted to specific neuronal compartments. However, like parvalbumin terminal, these spines exhibit exceptionally large Ca2+ transients, reinforcing the idea that PMCA2a is adapted to function in microdomains requiring rapid control of especially large Ca2+ transients. We found that PMCA2a concentrates in parvalbumin-positive inhibitory terminals throughout the brain. This antibody recognizes a single band of Mr ≈60,000 on immunoblots of synaptic membrane fractions from rat cerebral cortex. It shows positive binding with GABA, and GABA-KLH in a dot blot assay, and negative binding with bovine serum albumin (BSA) (manufacturer's technical information).For parvalbumin, a monoclonal anti-parvalbumin antibody (Sigma, PARV-19, P-3088) was used. Twelve male Sprague–Dawley rats (200–350 g, Charles River, Raleigh, NC) were used for this study. Single labelingFree-floating sections were permeabilized with 50% ethanol for 30 minutes and then treated for 30 minutes with 3% H2O2 in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, 0.1 M, pH 7.4). After pre-incubation in 10% normal donkey serum (NDS, to block secondary antibody binding sites), sections were incubated in primary antibody overnight on a shaker at room temperature. We used the primary antibodies at a concentration so low that antigen consistently failed to be revealed by a conventional fluorophore-conjugated secondary antibody (donkey antirabbit IgG conjugated to FITC; 1:200 for 3 hours, Jackson), but was still clearly detectable with TSA. To control for possible crossreaction between the first primary antibody and the second secondary antibody, the second primary antibody was omitted. Immunoreacted tissue was rinsed in PB, postfixed 1 hour in 1% osmium tetroxide, rinsed in PB, rinsed in 0.1 M maleate buffer (MB; pH 6), stained en bloc for 1 hour in 1% uranyl acetate in MB, rinsed, then dehydrated in a graded ethanol series followed by propylene oxide, infiltrated with a mixture of Epon and Spurr resins, embedded between two sheets of Aclar plastic supported by glass slides, and polymerized at 60°C for 36–48 hours. To permit more objective assessment of our double-stained material, we employed two different algorithms designed for this purpose. The intensity correlation analysis results are then presented as a pair of graphs, where the x-axis reflects the covariance of the channel and the y axis reflects the intensity distribution of the channel. Distributions that skew to the right indicate positively correlated staining patterns (where the two pixel staining intensity values vary in synchrony); ones that are symmetrical about the 0 axis indicate independent staining; and those that skew to the left indicate negatively correlated staining patterns, where the pixel staining intensity values vary inversely. In the spinal cord, PMCA2a staining was detected throughout the gray matter (Fig. 