Taken together, these results point to a sequence of conformational changes that leads to activation of endogenous transcription. 1a-e, Supplementary Video 1, Extended Data Figs. 1a-e, Supplementary Video 1, Extended Data Figs. 1a-e, Supplementary Video 1, Extended Data Figs. 1a-e, Supplementary Video 1, Extended Data Figs. The supernatant was collected and centrifuged at 80,000g for 60 minutes at 4°C to pellet the CPV virions. The dose rate of the electron beam was set to ~8e−/pixel/s, and the image stacks were recorded at 4 frames/sec for 3 seconds. The t-CPV cryoEM images were recorded on a new Gatan K2 direct electron detection camera attached to a Gatan imaging filter (GIF Quanta) with a pixel size of 1.36Å at the specimen scale (Extended Data Fig. The 2x binned data set was first processed using icosahedral symmetry with Frealign33. The centers of all particles were then fixed and used for the asymmetrical global search with Frealign using 4x binned data set starting at 20 Å resolution.To generate an initial model, we placed the crystal structure of the MRV RdRP2 under a previously obtained CPV capsid map35 at the location corresponding to that in MRV capsid as previously reported9 and imposed a tetrahedral symmetry (i.e., with 4 three-fold axes, 3 two-fold axes and 12 asymmetric units), resulting in a montage map with an empty CPV capsid containing 12 RdRPs but without any VP4. After 9 iterations of global search and 2 iterations of refinement, the resolution of the density map was determined to be 3.9Å. These estimated resolutions are consistent with the observed structural features of the density maps (Fig. 1), the map from the above Frealign asymmetric refinement (g) was low-pass filtered to 60 Å resolution, masked with a 260 Å radius (h), and used to refine the capsid-subtracted particle (f) with Relion version 1.2. The Tau2_fudge value (T-factor) in Relion was set to 0.5. 4a, Supplementary Video 1). Asymmetrical RNA density feature with 10 TECs emerged after 10 iterations (k). The task of the rest of the fourth stage of data processing is to select one out of these 60 orientation candidates to be the asymmetric orientation of the particle as done before4,5,43. For each of these 15 Relion orientations, we calculated its angular distances to the 60 icosahedral-related orientation candidates; and the icosahedral-related orientation candidate with the smallest angular distance was selected as the working orientation for that iteration, resulting in a total of 15 working orientations for each particle. For each of these 15 Relion orientations, we calculated its angular distances to the 60 icosahedral-related orientation candidates; and the icosahedral-related orientation candidate with the smallest angular distance was selected as the working orientation for that iteration, resulting in a total of 15 working orientations for each particle. The result is the same, confirming our procedure was not influenced by the choice of initial model. Additionally, refinement was also performed based on the Ramachandran plot, an important indicator of three-dimensional protein structure that validates the torsion angles of a protein chain. In the Ramachandran plot, any residues with disallowed values were selected, and the stereochemistry of that residue along with its surrounding residues was optimized with the refinement tool “Regularize Zone.” After ideal Ramachandran values were obtained (<1% outliers), the refinement function “Rotamers” was used to select a rotamer that best fit the density.The atomic model of the polymerase structure was also manually built with Coot. The effective resolutions of the local averaged maps are ~3.3 Å (c) and ~4.0 Å (d) resolution (FSC≥0.143) for maps in the quiescent and transcribing, respectively. Position of a TEC on the inner surface of capsid in the quiescent (b) and transcribing (c) states. Position of a TEC on the inner surface of capsid in the quiescent (b) and transcribing (c) states. Position of a TEC on the inner surface of capsid in the quiescent (b) and transcribing (c) states. An icosahedral 5-fold axis is indicated with a small green pentagon. An icosahedral 5-fold axis is indicated with a small green pentagon. Due to their flexibility, these residues are not readily visible when displayed as in (a) and (b) but become visible when the maps are filtered to a lower resolution (e.g., 4.5Å resolution) as in (c-f). Due to their flexibility, these residues are not readily visible when displayed as in (a) and (b) but become visible when the maps are filtered to a lower resolution (e.g., 4.5Å resolution) as in (c-f). Due to their flexibility, these residues are not readily visible when displayed as in (a) and (b) but become visible when the maps are filtered to a lower resolution (e.g., 4.5Å resolution) as in (c-f). f, The same as (e) but in a different view to show the unambiguous trace of the two peptide fragments. 4 and Supplementary Video 1); instead, many extend tangentially from one TEC to another (e.g., duplexes i-iii in Fig. 1g) binds to each of the 10 TECs at the same relative position and orientation, suggesting that this RNA duplex is a conserved feature among the 10 dsRNA segments. Moreover, the organization of TECs with the dsRNA genome and the mechanism of transcriptional activation have remained mysteries, in contrast to the well understood genome organization inside dsDNA viruses4,5. But, remarkably, bluetongue virus VP4 is an RNA capping enzyme and its α/β domain does not bind GTP (Ref 16). A GTP is identified (Figs 1g, 3a) at the position equivalent to the cap-binding site observed in the MRV RdRP2. 3b, Extended Data Figs 5, Supplementary Video 9). 4a,b) and the blockage of the active site by the Bα5-loop-Bα6 fragment is removed (Fig. 7d,f) through interaction between a major groove of the RNA duplex and residue Arg979 of Module B (Fig. We anticipate that detachment of the RNA duplex would permit RNA to slide towards the template entry channel for RNA synthesis in t-CPV. In addition to enclosing the viral genome and anchoring TECs, the capsid shell protein (CSP) also regulates polymerase activity in dsRNA viruses22-25. A CSP N-terminal fragment, unresolved in all previous structures21,28-30, is resolved here to form a helix in the two TEC-interacting CSP subunits in both q-CPV and t-CPV (Fig. 