To load a file, select the “MAIN” tab at the top of the window and click on “LOAD” in the dropdown. To load a file, select the “MAIN” tab at the top of the window and click on “LOAD” in the dropdown. To load a file, select the “MAIN” tab at the top of the window and click on “LOAD” in the dropdown. To load a file, select the “MAIN” tab at the top of the window and click on “LOAD” in the dropdown. Once completed, the appropriate hardware settings will be loaded and appear in the “M1/M2 DCC-100” pop-up window.Configuration settings will vary depending on the hardware you have and its installment. In the hardware configuration for our system, Module 1 controls the TCSPC detectors and a shutter that allows light into the detectors, Module 2 controls the 405 and 445 nm pulsed lasers, and Module 3 controls the 488 and 561 nm pulsed lasers. To do so highlight +5v under Connector 3 (445 nm pulsed laser) and adjust laser to desired power. In the “SPC-150 Save SPC file” pop-up click on “Select File (F9)” and select or create a file folder in which to save the FLIM images and to name the file. In the “SPC-150 Save SPC file” pop-up click on “Select File (F9)” and select or create a file folder in which to save the FLIM images and to name the file. Since longer average lifetimes indicate lower FRET and shorter average lifetimes indicate higher FRET, we chose to display as R-G-B. The τD value of 3573.2 ps (note SPCM64 software deals in ps rather than ns) was used for all future analyses (described below) to fit a double-exponential decay function under possible FRET conditions in which the acceptor mVenus was present.Protocol note: FLIM analysis can be done on a smaller region of the field of view by dragging in the white crosshairs from the corners of the donor image in the left window. Repeat steps 1 and 2 from Donor lifetime measurements using SPCImage in donor alone conditionsIn the “Multiexpontial Decay” interface (bottom of screen, right of the decay curve) select “2” for “Components”. In the case of the 2-exponential fit being done in this section, the interface will display the percentage of the reporter engaged in FRET as a1[%], the short lifetime of the donor (due to FRET) as t1[ps], and the percentage of reporter not engaged in FRET as a2[%]. The long lifetime t2[ps] will read the value at which it was fixed (for us this was 3573.2).Repeat steps 9 – 12 from Donor lifetime measurements using SPCImage in donor alone conditions as necessary to acquire a sufficient amount of data for your needs. FLIM-FRET lifetime measurements for the cylinB1-Cdk1 reporters in this proof of principle are reported in Table III.Measuring FRET efficiency from FLIM-FRET data using SPCImageFRET efficiency can be calculated given the fluorescent lifetime of the donor fluorophore under both FRET and non-FRET conditions. Under “Coding of” at the bottom of the pop-up select “1 – τm/τ2” in the dropdown for the “Value”. Click on “OK”.Blue crosshairs will automatically center upon the brightest pixel when you import an image. Click on “OK”.Blue crosshairs will automatically center upon the brightest pixel when you import an image. Proof of concept 2 – Camui CaMKII sensor in human HEK293T cells Camui is a FRET biosensor for CaMKII activity (Takao et al , 2005). B.Establishing timing of Ca2+ release in HEK293T cells by addition of ionomycinCa2+ entry into the cell leads to CaMKII activation. We use ionomycin to induce Ca2+ release in HEK293T cells. In the system described in this chapter this would simply require changing the dichroic mirror and bandpass (BP) filters in the TCSPC module and a dichroic mirror in the confocal scanning microscope. The fast pace at which TCSPC and scanning confocal hardware is improving combined with the continued development of new fluorescent proteins and dye-based technologies means that significant advancements in FLIM-FRET in the vein of dual FLIM imaging will continue for years to come. The fast pace at which TCSPC and scanning confocal hardware is improving combined with the continued development of new fluorescent proteins and dye-based technologies means that significant advancements in FLIM-FRET in the vein of dual FLIM imaging will continue for years to come. 2) Both molecules must be within angstroms to nanometers distance to each other 2) Both molecules must be within angstroms to nanometers distance to each other Since the energy transfer efficiency changes as the inverse sixth power (r−6) of the distance r between the donor and acceptor, selection of the proper FRET pairs allows the researcher to monitor distance changes in the angstrom and nanometer range, which makes the approach relevant for probing macromolecular structural dynamics at the scale of proteins and nucleic acids within living samples. Since there are two competing kinetic pathways (fluorescence and non-radiative) under FRET conditions, the lifetime of the donor becomes shorter than its lifetime under non-FRET conditions. Since some fraction a1 of donors will not have acceptor in their vicinity, these donors would fluoresce with the normal baseline lifetime τ1. The microscope described in this chapter is a commercially available “turn-key” system that is stable enough to be housed in a microscopy core facility. Unlike intensity-based FRET experiments the acceptor can be “dark” or non-fluorescent (Ganesan, Ameer-Beg, Ng, Vojnovic, & Wouters, 2006; Murakoshi, Lee, & Yasuda, 2008; H. Murakoshi, A. C. E. Shibata, Y. Nakahata, & J. Nabekura, 2015) because only the lifetime of the donor needs to be measured. A FLIM system can be set up on an existing scanning confocal microscope system such as the Nikon A1 confocal system described here, which is depicted in Figure 3. A parts list and estimated costs for a system with 4 pulsed lasers (405 nm, 445 nm, 488 nm, and 561 nm), accompanying filters and dichroic mirrors, and two TCSPC detectors is provided in Table I. The scan head has two laser input ports and three emission output ports. Four continuous-wave lasers (Nikon LUN-V; 405, 488, 561, and 640 nm) were combined and fiber-coupled into one input port and four pulsed lasers (Becker & Hickl; BDL-405-SMN, BDL-445-SMN, BDL-488-SMN, and BDS-561-SMY; 405, 445, 488, and 561 nm respectively) were combined and fiber-coupled into the second input port. Four continuous-wave lasers (Nikon LUN-V; 405, 488, 561, and 640 nm) were combined and fiber-coupled into one input port and four pulsed lasers (Becker & Hickl; BDL-405-SMN, BDL-445-SMN, BDL-488-SMN, and BDS-561-SMY; 405, 445, 488, and 561 nm respectively) were combined and fiber-coupled into the second input port. mitotic versus interphase) can be identified and centered in the field of view within ~3–5 seconds. The chapter will not detail the transfection protocol or general culturing of Drosophila S2 cells as we have detailed this elsewhere (Ye & Maresca, 2016). Table II shows fluorophores that exhibit single exponential decay, and thus are best-suited for use with FLIM-FRET. The “AUX Settings” GUI will appear to allow you to define the system settings such that the input into the scan head will be the pulsed laser and the proper dichroic mirror will be positioned in the light path to allow the appropriate emitted photons to reach the TCSPC detectors. On our system, under “Filter and Dye” 400–457/514 was selected in the dropdown next to “1st DM” and the laser was set to “Port 2” in the dropdown under “Detector External”., All boxes under “Acquisition” in the AUX Settings GUI were unchecked.Click on “START” at the top of the AUX SETTINGS interface. On our system, under “Filter and Dye” 400–457/514 was selected in the dropdown next to “1st DM” and the laser was set to “Port 2” in the dropdown under “Detector External”., All boxes under “Acquisition” in the AUX Settings GUI were unchecked.Click on “START” at the top of the AUX SETTINGS interface. On our system, under “Filter and Dye” 400–457/514 was selected in the dropdown next to “1st DM” and the laser was set to “Port 2” in the dropdown under “Detector External”., All boxes under “Acquisition” in the AUX Settings GUI were unchecked.Click on “START” at the top of the AUX SETTINGS interface. At this point, be sure that the appropriate pulsed laser (ours was 445 nm set to 50 mHz) is turned on.Open SPCM64 and load settings from a template file supplied by the system installer or, if a return user, by loading a file from a prior experiment. 