Blue voxels in Figure 2 represent deactivations at a threshold of P < 0.001, uncorrected, with those satisfying this threshold having a false discovery rate <0.08. Blue voxels in Figure 2 represent deactivations at a threshold of P < 0.001, uncorrected, with those satisfying this threshold having a false discovery rate <0.08. Only clusters comprised of 20 voxels or more are displayed. Note that similar patterns arise in the unscaled case, but only after imposing a more stringent T threshold on the thalamic activation and a less stringent T threshold on the fusiform deactivation. The quality assessment using visual inspection detected artifacts, mostly associated with motion, in each of the 35 EEGs used in this study. Cortical neurons and relay cells of the geniculate body form a closed loop circuit with axons that pass through and form side branches into the lateral reticular nucleus. Cortical neurons and relay cells of the geniculate body form a closed loop circuit with axons that pass through and form side branches into the lateral reticular nucleus. Cortical neurons and relay cells of the geniculate body form a closed loop circuit with axons that pass through and form side branches into the lateral reticular nucleus. As observed in earlier studies of alpha (Goncalves et al , 2006; Laufs et al , 2006a), some variety is seen in the temporal evolution of alpha intensity from session to session. The broader thalamic and fusiform ROIs have the same outcome, but with less significance. Measurements of alpha-like rhythms in these structures in animal models lend support to this scenario (Buzsaki, 1991; da Silva et al , 1973). Increasing field strength improves sensitivity to the BOLD response but, at the same time, augments EEG artifacts including those induced by the gradient coils during image acquisition. Rhythmic activity can be attenuated by excitatory inputs to the relay cells either from retinal afferents or from layer V neurons of other cortical areas. Rhythmic activity can be attenuated by excitatory inputs to the relay cells either from retinal afferents or from layer V neurons of other cortical areas. Nevertheless, the results can be discussed in the framework of current understanding of brain dynamics. This is consistent with cortico-thalamo-cortical processes between layer V neurons of networked cortical areas through nuclei of the thalamus other than the lateral geniculate. This is consistent with cortico-thalamo-cortical processes between layer V neurons of networked cortical areas through nuclei of the thalamus other than the lateral geniculate. This is consistent with cortico-thalamo-cortical processes between layer V neurons of networked cortical areas through nuclei of the thalamus other than the lateral geniculate. This is consistent with cortico-thalamo-cortical processes between layer V neurons of networked cortical areas through nuclei of the thalamus other than the lateral geniculate. There are individual sessions for each ROI that fail to show activation or indeed activate in a manner opposite to that observed in the group analysis. However, in contrast to the data from the literature (Goncalves et al , 2006; Laufs et al , 2006a), normality tests fail to suggest a multimodal distribution of activation patterns in any of the ROIs considered. The observed variation in alpha strength occurs at sub-Hertz frequencies aligned with those recently reported for spontaneous fluctuations in resting state Blood Oxygen Level Dependent (BOLD) signals (Damoiseaux et al , 2006; Gusnard et al , 2001). These broader derivations are plausibly more influenced by alpha-like rhythms, such as the mu rhythm (Niedermeyer, 1997) that emanate predominantly from central regions. It is used here, however, under the premise that in the relaxed state with no directed task a homeostasis of mental effort might be established. This forms the basis of a conjecture that the average BOLD intensity across the brain unchallenged by a specific task remains constant. It should be noted that without global scaling the same activation/deactivations patterns arise, but with more emphasis concentrated on the thalamic activations (Fig. As research and clinical scanners continue to evolve to higher field strength and as EEG technology geared to the magnetic resonance environment improves (Vasios et al , 2006), this technique promises to remain viable. The advent of methods to subtract the large EEG artifact caused by the rapidly switching gradient coil currents during fMRI has permitted the use of all time points of EEG data acquired concurrently with imaging (Allen et al , 2000). Successful correction for ballistocardiographic and gradient artifacts has been demonstrated recently at fields up to 3 Tesla for other applications of concurrent EEG and fMRI (Debener et al , 2005; Vincent et al , 2007). T2*-weighted, BOLD sensitive, echo-planar images were acquired with parameters: repetition time/echo time = 1800/25 milliseconds, field of view = 256 mm × 256 mm, matrix = 64 × 64, 5-mm slice thickness with axial orientation. For all but four of the scanning sessions, a total of 400 image volumes were acquired at the rate of one every 3 seconds for a total acquisition time of 20 minutes per session. Eye movement and ECG data were also collected for subsequent ballistocardiographic artifact removal. Using these methods, a range of frequencies principally from 1 to 40 Hz is routinely measured for clinical and research applications. The cleaned data were subsequently decimated to 200 Hz and derived in a standard, 16-channel bipolar montage. Image Processing and Statistical AnalysisSpatial preprocessing and statistical analysis under the general linear model were performed using Statistical Parametric Mapping software (SPM5, http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/). Individual interscan intervals were scored for alpha activity according to the mean of the magnitudes of the Fourier transform frequency components between 8 and 13 Hz. The longest known and most prominent of these is the alpha rhythm occupying the frequency range of 8 to 13 Hz with greatest power detectable by EEG electrodes overlying the occipital lobes (Berger, 1929). After applying a threshold for statistical significance, activated voxels in the composite were localized by overlay on an anatomic reference image generated by averaging the individual structural images of all subjects. Both activation and deactivation was observed in the composite maps as shown in selected axial slices in Figure 2. Activation is displayed in orange at a P value threshold of 0.001, uncorrected. A cluster is also present in medial cerebellum. 