The spectrum of 14 can be explained as being derived from both the cyclic and acyclic forms of this aldehyde (Fig. The presence of the cyclic form can explain the ready loss of water, as well as the base peak of m/z 70 which has the structure of protonated dihydropyrrole. Its most common use is as a trypsin substrate to measure enzymatic activity of trypsin preparations [51]. The biosynthetic origin of cimipronidine has not yet been established, but is most certainly linked to arginine metabolism. Salsolinol (23), a condensation product of dopamine and acetaldehyde, can be considered a prototype molecule of this class. It was initially identified based on spectral database searches and subsequently confirmed by comparison with an authentic standard [39]. It was initially identified based on spectral database searches and subsequently confirmed by comparison with an authentic standard [39]. Importantly, salsolinol can be synthesized endogenously in dopaminergic neurons of mammals including humans [57]. However, recent studies showed that salsolinol does not cross the blood brain barrier [59]. Traces of formaldehyde might have been present in the extraction solvent, which may have led to a nonenzymatic condensation with dopamine [57]. When it comes to phytochemical investigations, the past several decades of research have focused almost exclusively on two abundant classes of compounds: triterpene glycosides and phenolic acids. Triterpene glycosides represent the major constituents of all hydroalcoholic black cohosh extracts and have been extensively studied from both the phytochemical and biological side. Triterpene glycosides represent the major constituents of all hydroalcoholic black cohosh extracts and have been extensively studied from both the phytochemical and biological side. Triterpene glycosides represent the major constituents of all hydroalcoholic black cohosh extracts and have been extensively studied from both the phytochemical and biological side. Triterpene glycosides represent the major constituents of all hydroalcoholic black cohosh extracts and have been extensively studied from both the phytochemical and biological side. Triterpene glycosides represent the major constituents of all hydroalcoholic black cohosh extracts and have been extensively studied from both the phytochemical and biological side. Laurolitsine (32), for example, displayed IC50 values of 2.6 and 6.8 µM against dopamine D1 and D2 receptors, respectively. Interestingly, a recent study by de la Peña et al  claims that magnoflorine possesses sedative and anxiolytic effects mediated by the GABAergic system [82]. Biological activities of protopine and allocryptopine have been extensively studied (for a review see [85]). 2.6.1 Tryptophan-Derived Pictet-Spengler AdductsCompounds 40 and 41 are Pictet-Spengler adducts formed by condensation of tryptophan with formaldehyde and acetaldehyde, respectively. By similar reasoning, 41 was identified as 1-methyl-1,2,3,4-tetrahydro-β-carboline-3-carboxylic acid and confirmed by comparison with authentic standard. By similar reasoning, 41 was identified as 1-methyl-1,2,3,4-tetrahydro-β-carboline-3-carboxylic acid and confirmed by comparison with authentic standard. By similar reasoning, 41 was identified as 1-methyl-1,2,3,4-tetrahydro-β-carboline-3-carboxylic acid and confirmed by comparison with authentic standard. By similar reasoning, 41 was identified as 1-methyl-1,2,3,4-tetrahydro-β-carboline-3-carboxylic acid and confirmed by comparison with authentic standard. β-Carboline is a common structural motif for monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibition; however, 40 and 41 do not inhibit MAO [97]. 2.6.2 Nω-Methylserotonin and Corresponding Pictet-Spengler AdductsIdentification of Nω-methylserotonin (10) represents an important chapter in the black cohosh alkaloid story. 2.6.2 Nω-Methylserotonin and Corresponding Pictet-Spengler AdductsIdentification of Nω-methylserotonin (10) represents an important chapter in the black cohosh alkaloid story. 2.6.2 Nω-Methylserotonin and Corresponding Pictet-Spengler AdductsIdentification of Nω-methylserotonin (10) represents an important chapter in the black cohosh alkaloid story. In the radioligand displacement assay, the methanolic extract was found to inhibit binding of receptor probes 8-OHDPAT (5-HT1A) and LSD (5-HT7) with IC50 values of 2.5 and 2.2 µg/mL, respectively. The 75 % ethanolic extract was somewhat more selective, with IC50 values of 13.0 and 3.1 µg/mL for the 5-HT1A and 5-HT7 receptors, respectively. The 75 % ethanolic extract was somewhat more selective, with IC50 values of 13.0 and 3.1 µg/mL for the 5-HT1A and 5-HT7 receptors, respectively. In plants, it has been reported in Ranunculus sceleratus (Ranunculaceae) [101] and, interestingly, in several Citrus species [102]. In support of this hypothesis, we did detect Nω-methylserotonin in aerial parts (submitted manuscript). In support of this hypothesis, we did detect Nω-methylserotonin in aerial parts (submitted manuscript). In support of this hypothesis, we did detect Nω-methylserotonin in aerial parts (submitted manuscript). The affinity for 5-HT7 was particularly strong, with an IC50 of 23 pM, which makes Nω-methylserotonin one of the most potent known ligands to any receptor, not just to 5-HT7. For comparison, the natural ligand serotonin showed an IC50 value of 0.86 nM for the same receptor. The kinetic parameters (Km and Vmax/Km) were very similar to those of serotonin, suggesting that orally taken Nω-methylserotonin is unlikely to reach the CNS in any appreciable amount. These constituents represent a largely unexplored part of the black cohosh metabolome, and most of the work in this area has been confined to our laboratories in the UIC/NIH Center for Botanical Dietary Supplements Research. In addition, a dihydro-β-carboline compound N(2)-methyl-6-hydroxy-3,4-dihydro-β-carboline (45) was also identified. In addition, a dihydro-β-carboline compound N(2)-methyl-6-hydroxy-3,4-dihydro-β-carboline (45) was also identified. The presence of 44 was confirmed by comparison of retention times and fragmentation pattern with the authentic standard (Fig. In contrast to the β-carbolines, azepine structures cannot produce retro Diels-Alder fragments and fragment instead by opening of the azepine ring followed by elimination of methylene imine to produce the base peak (m/z 188 in 44 and 174 in 43).Further confirmation of the structure of 44 was derived from NMR analysis. Which cyclization pathway will predominate depends both on the experimental conditions and on the type of aldehyde. The ready loss of a methyl radical (m/z 186), along with the fragment ion of m/z 170 corresponding to the loss of methylamine (MH-CH3NH2)+, indicated that the N(2) nitrogen on the β-carboline ring was methylated. It is somewhat surprising that the alkaloid metabolome of black cohosh has been overlooked for so long, considering that from a chemotaxonomic perspective the Ranunculaceae family is a well-known producer of alkaloids. It is somewhat surprising that the alkaloid metabolome of black cohosh has been overlooked for so long, considering that from a chemotaxonomic perspective the Ranunculaceae family is a well-known producer of alkaloids. It is somewhat surprising that the alkaloid metabolome of black cohosh has been overlooked for so long, considering that from a chemotaxonomic perspective the Ranunculaceae family is a well-known producer of alkaloids. It is somewhat surprising that the alkaloid metabolome of black cohosh has been overlooked for so long, considering that from a chemotaxonomic perspective the Ranunculaceae family is a well-known producer of alkaloids. It is somewhat surprising that the alkaloid metabolome of black cohosh has been overlooked for so long, considering that from a chemotaxonomic perspective the Ranunculaceae family is a well-known producer of alkaloids. Accordingly, the most likely position of the double bond is 1,2 which was confirmed by comparison of retention time and fragmentation pattern with authentic N(2)-methyl-6-hydroxy-3,4-dihydro-β-carboline. It should be noted that dihydro-β-carbolines are often by-products of Pictet-Spengler condensation [107]. Thus, it is possible that 45 is an isolation artifact. 2.12, the fragmentation pattern of α-N-feruloyl/isoferuloyl arginine (47, 48) is dominated by fragment ions of m/z 177, 149, 145, 117, and 89 originating from the ferulic/isoferulic acid portion of the amide. The first is that amides of isoferulic acid tend to produce less of the secondary fragment ions (m/z 149, 145 and 117) originating from elimination of small neutrals (H2O, MeOH, and CO) from the primary acylium ion (m/z 177) (compare Fig. Our investigations on both quadrupole/time-of-flight and ion trap instruments revealed that this fragment ion originates from an ion-molecule reaction in the collision cell and is formed by addition of water to the ion of m/z 145. After subtracting ferulic acid (C10H10O4) and adding a water molecule to account for the fact that water is lost during formation of the amide, the formula of the amine is predicted as C6H14N4O2. However, due to changing taxonomic classification and varying degrees of documentation for some of those reports, it was not always clear whether the tested species was indeed A. racemosa. In all cases, the geometry of the double bond was shown to be trans as characterized by the large coupling constant (3JH,H = ~15.7 Hz, average) between the olefinic protons. This represents the key bonding link between the two structural components in the molecule. Although mass spectrometry cannot distinguish between the cis and trans configurations of the double bonds in these compounds, based on co-elution with the synthetic standards the configuration was determined to be trans in all cases. No identification of a specific compound was mentioned in that early report. Interestingly, a recent publication by Yim et al  described identification of cis and trans N-feruloyl tyramine-4′-O-β-d-allopyranoside and trans N-feruloyl methoxytyramine-4′-O-β-d-allopyranoside from Actaea (syn. This observation can be explained by a lack of readily available acidic hydrogen that needs to be transferred to the amine during fragmentation. A glycosyl transferase gene was also detected that could be involved in the synthesis of glycosidated analogs. Similar cholinergic activities have not been investigated for ferulic and isoferulic acid choline esters. l-carnitine is widely distributed throughout the plant and animal kingdoms. The origin of these constituents is unclear, and it is possible that they are impurities from extraction solvents. This hypothesis is very intriguing, as such compounds have not been explored in detail either chemically or biologically. This hypothesis is very intriguing, as such compounds have not been explored in detail either chemically or biologically. As all clinical trials to date were carried out without consideration and/or knowledge of the existence of these alkaloids, there is no way of knowing how much (if any) of these compounds were present in the tested extracts. For example, at 100 µM of the test compound, even 99 % purity would result in a 1 µM concentration of impurity. This process led to the identification of Nω-methylserotonin (10) as the active serotonergic principle [38]. Therefore, the present findings of a prominent alkaloid metabolome in black cohosh make it important to check any isolated compound, especially phenolic acids, for possible alkaloid impurities. Therefore, the present findings of a prominent alkaloid metabolome in black cohosh make it important to check any isolated compound, especially phenolic acids, for possible alkaloid impurities. Therefore, the present findings of a prominent alkaloid metabolome in black cohosh make it important to check any isolated compound, especially phenolic acids, for possible alkaloid impurities. Another benefit of the basic nitrogen is that molecular species observed upon electrospray ionization are typically protonated molecules. The latter point should not be underestimated as the analyst ultimately has to reconcile the mass spectrometry data with what is realistically possible (or probable) in nature. The latter point should not be underestimated as the analyst ultimately has to reconcile the mass spectrometry data with what is realistically possible (or probable) in nature. The latter point should not be underestimated as the analyst ultimately has to reconcile the mass spectrometry data with what is realistically possible (or probable) in nature. Because of the risks associated with hormone replacement therapy, black cohosh preparations have become popular dietary supplements among women seeking alternative treatments for menopausal complaints [2, 3]. Because of the risks associated with hormone replacement therapy, black cohosh preparations have become popular dietary supplements among women seeking alternative treatments for menopausal complaints [2, 3]. One challenging aspect of elucidating compounds from black cohosh was that database searches in many instances returned no hits, suggesting an entirely new structure. In other words, the assignment can be made with various degrees of confidence. The most commonly used nomenclature is that proposed by Sumner et al  [45], which assigns three levels of confidence. Comparison of tandem mass spectra of close chemical analogs is a viable approach commonly used in drug metabolism or chemical degradation studies. The basic idea behind this approach is the long-established “shift technique” pioneered by Klaus Biemann [46, 47]. Perhaps fittingly, the original approach was developed to determine the structure of alkaloids. Even if the measured spectrum of the unknown matches a published spectrum, without comparison of retention times under identical conditions, there is always a possibility that the two compounds may just be close structural analogs. A molecular formula with three or more nitrogens is a strong indicator for the presence of a guanidino group, as there are few other possibilities that can account for so many nitrogens in the molecule, particularly if the molecular mass is modest (<400 Da). During collision-induced dissociation, acyclic guanidines display a characteristic loss of neutral guanidine (−59 Da; CH5N3). 