A microRNA (miRNA)-based inducible RNA interference (RNAi) silences specific transcripts based on discrete 22-nucleotide sequences (Chen et al , 2007; Shi et al , 2007). We characterized neurite tracts in the embryonic ventral ganglion that typically consists of bilaterally symmetric longitudinal fascicles connected across the midline via repeated pairs of commissure bundles. These results demonstrate that Dscam+19 plays a more important role than Dscam−19 in the development of the Drosophila embryonic CNS. Although MB morphogenesis involves Dscam variants lacking exons 19 and 23, past studies have shown that the Dscam+19+23 transgene, no matter which ectodomain it carries and whether it is fused with GFP at the carboxyl terminus or not, can effectively prevent sister branches from extending into the same axon bundle in single-cell clones of Dscam mutant neurons (Soba et al , 2007; Wang et al , 2004; Zhan et al , 2004). We analyzed MB α/β neurons, whose axons extend through the peduncle, undergo bifurcation at the peduncle end, and then innervate the MB α and β lobes with only one primary branch from each neuron (Figure 5C). 97% of Dscam mutant single-cell MARCM clones of MB α/β neurons sent two or more neurites into one MB lobe, exhibiting the multi-branches/lobe phenotype (Figure 5B–5F). Previously, we have reported an assay to visualize Dscam protein distribution in the larval MBs by inducing UAS-Dscam::GFP transgenes in mature larval MB neurons using GAL4-201Y (Wang et al , 2004). This raises the possibility that Dscam protein distribution may vary depending on the presence or absence of exon 19.However, GAL4-201Y drove expression of Dscam::GFPs in excessive amounts and in mature MB neurons, which is in contrast with the endogenous Dscam being expressed at a much lower level and typically in newly derived post-mitotic neurons (Zhan et al , 2004). Transient binary induction of UAS-transgene is possible with the TARGET system, in which GAL4 activity is suppressed until inactivation of temperature-sensitive GAL80 at a restrictive temperature (McGuire et al , 2003). Transient binary induction of UAS-transgene is possible with the TARGET system, in which GAL4 activity is suppressed until inactivation of temperature-sensitive GAL80 at a restrictive temperature (McGuire et al , 2003). Derepression of GAL4-OK107 following a heat shock to inactivate GAL80ts allowed one to weakly express UAS-transgene in young MB neurons as judged by the central localization of neurites in the age-dependent concentrically organized axon bundles (Kurusu et al , 2002). In contrast, Dscam+19::GFP accumulated in cell bodies as well as neurites (Figure 6A and 6C). In contrast, Dscam+19::GFP accumulated in cell bodies as well as neurites (Figure 6A and 6C). In contrast, Dscam+19::GFP accumulated in cell bodies as well as neurites (Figure 6A and 6C). In contrast, Dscam+19::GFP accumulated in cell bodies as well as neurites (Figure 6A and 6C). Dscam+17.1–19::GFP further accumulated in the glomeruli where PN dendrites elaborate (Figure 7D). Dscam+17.1–19::GFP further accumulated in the glomeruli where PN dendrites elaborate (Figure 7D). This conclusion derives from: (1) the analysis of Dscam transcript compositions by RT-PCR, (2) the localization of specific Dscam endodomains by depleting the alternatives via RNAi against exon 19, exon 23, or the unique exon-exon junctions derived from skipping of exon 19 or exon 23 (Figure 2), and (3) the direct visualization of Dscam+19 using Ab19 as opposed to labeling all the Dscam isoforms with Ab18 (Figure 3). Dscam+19 is primarily used during embryogenesis, whereas Dscam−19 abundantly exists in the post-embryonic nervous system (Figure 3D and 3F). Dscam+19 is primarily used during embryogenesis, whereas Dscam−19 abundantly exists in the post-embryonic nervous system (Figure 3D and 3F). Consistent with these expression profiles, endogenous Dscam−19 plays an essential role in post-embryonic neuronal morphogenesis (Figure 2J and Figure 4C), while Dscam+19 plays a role in the formation of embryonic CNS (Figure 3D and Figure 4F). An ITAM is defined by a motif containing two tyrosine residues within the consensus sequence of YxxI/Lx(6–12)YxxI/L (Fodor et al , 2006). An ITAM is defined by a motif containing two tyrosine residues within the consensus sequence of YxxI/Lx(6–12)YxxI/L (Fodor et al , 2006). An ITAM is defined by a motif containing two tyrosine residues within the consensus sequence of YxxI/Lx(6–12)YxxI/L (Fodor et al , 2006). An ITAM is defined by a motif containing two tyrosine residues within the consensus sequence of YxxI/Lx(6–12)YxxI/L (Fodor et al , 2006). An ITAM is defined by a motif containing two tyrosine residues within the consensus sequence of YxxI/Lx(6–12)YxxI/L (Fodor et al , 2006). By contrast, in the clone-specific rescue experiments, the α and β lobes were both normal, and the Dscam transgene was only expressed in the neuron that exhibited the single-branch/neuron phenotype (Figure 5G). Their targets are indicated in Figure 1A, and the complete nucleotide sequences of the constructs are available upon request. Their targets are indicated in Figure 1A, and the complete nucleotide sequences of the constructs are available upon request. FliesTransgenic flies carrying various UAS-RNAis were obtained by P element-mediated germ line transformation with technical support from Genetic Services, Inc. miRNA-based RNA interference permits differential silencing of Dscam transcripts encoding distinct endodomainsBased on the analysis of RT-PCR products, we have previously suggested that four possible Dscam endodomains, extending from exon 18 to exon 24, could be generated from independent alternative splicing of exon 19 and exon 23 (Wang et al , 2004). Differential expression of Dscams with different endodomainsWe have made a UAS-18RNAi transgene targeting the exon 18 shared by all Dscam transcripts, and previously demonstrated that ubiquitous induction of UAS-18RNAi abolished endogenous Dscam expression in the developing nervous system (Shi et al , 2007). To determine the effectiveness of our new RNAi transgenes in silencing the endogenous expression of Dscam, we examined how induction of individual or multiple Dscam RNAis affected the endogenous patterns of Dscam expression at different developmental stages.In control embryos, immunostaining with an anti-Dscam exon 18 monoclonal antibody (Ab18) revealed that endogenous Dscam is concentrated on the ladder-like axonal tracts of the ventral ganglion (Figure 2A). As to the induction of UAS-19RNAi (Figure 2C) versus UAS-18/20RNAi (Figure 2B), the ladder-like patterns of immunostaining, though weakened, looked morphologically indistinguishable from those seen in control embryos (Figure 2A). Pan-neuronal induction of either UAS-19RNAi (Figure 2K) or UAS-23RNAi (Figure 2O) to deplete Dscam+19 or Dscam+23 minimally affected the expression pattern or level of endogenous Dscam. Upon induction of UAS-18/20RNAi to eliminate Dscam−19 (Figure 2J), the residual Dscam, though barely detectable, existed in a similar pattern to that of control animals (Figure 2I). Further, elaboration of dendrites versus axons in the same neuron may involve different subsets of Dscam ectodomains, since a Dscam ectodomain can be selectively targeted to dendrites or axons depending on its transmembrane domain (Shi et al , 2007). These results suggest that larval development of the Drosophila CNS is mainly supported by Dscam isoforms lacking exons 19 and 23. Further, a similar ladder-like pattern of immunocytochemical signals, which was eliminated in Dscam-null embryos, was detected following immunostaining of wild-type embryos with the Ab18 (Figure 3A–3B) or Ab19 (Figure 3D–3E). 