Residues with a ΔCS value between 0.1 ppm and 0.5 ppm were considered moderately perturbed. RosettaCM modeling of mTSPOModel 1 from the mTSPONMR structural ensemble (PDB 2GMY), the bcTSPOX-ray crystal structure (PDB 4RYI) and the rsTSPOX-Ray crystal structure (PDB 4UC2) were energy-minimized using the Rosetta FastRelax protocol (Conway et al  2014) running alternating cycles of bond and angle optimization and side-chain repacking to produce mTSPONMR-opt, bcTSPOX-Ray-opt and rsTSPOX-Ray-opt models. The φ/ψ angles at positions P ro44–Pro45, Pro96–Pro97 and Pro131–Pro132 of the 20 top-energy models of mTSPONMR-opt and mTSPORosettaCM were used for the analysis. A total of 2000 docking models of VUIIS8310 in complex with mTSPORosettaCM and mTSPONMR-opt were constructed using maximal translational and rotational sampling magnitudes of 5Å and 360°, respectively. For example, there are no backbone amide peaks that exhibit 1H chemical shifts higher than 8.8 ppm. 2, red line), while PK11195 was previously reported to bind mTSPO with nanomolar affinity (Lacapère and Papadopoulos 2003; Papadopoulos et al  1994; Owen et al  2012). A theoretical NMR titration binding curve assuming such high nanomolar affinity and a 1:1 binding stoichiometry is plotted in Fig. A theoretical NMR titration binding curve assuming such high nanomolar affinity and a 1:1 binding stoichiometry is plotted in Fig. A theoretical NMR titration binding curve assuming such high nanomolar affinity and a 1:1 binding stoichiometry is plotted in Fig. One report also suggested that the effect of early generation TSPO ligands on steroidogenesis might be the result of alteration of membrane properties by ligands or other off-target effects (Hatty et al  2014). Intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence reveals the effects of detergent and temperature on the PK11195 binding affinity to mTSPOTo determine the effect of detergent concentration, detergent type and temperature on the binding affinity of PK11195 to mTSPO, an intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence quenching assay was used to complement the NMR binding studies. For all samples of mTSPO-DPC at 42 °C, the high-affinity apparent binding constant for Tr1 (KappTr1) was around ~ 10−6 mol fraction units and was independent of the DPC concentration (Figure S3A). This concentration phase in the fluorescence titration experiments correlated with the binding transition observed under NMR conditions (Fig. Thus, fluorescence-monitored titrations confirm the binding event observed by NMR, but also suggest some additional, high affinity, binding process to the mTSPO-micelle complex.To assess temperature effects on the Tr1 and Tr2 transitions, we performed the same set of fluorescence experiments at room temperature for mTSPO in DPC micelles and in DDM micelles (Fig. At room temperature, the KappTr2 value (i.e. However, using the TSPO global knockout mice, it was subsequently demonstrated that activation of microglia after neuronal injury does not require TSPO, though microglia isolated from TSPO knockouts have altered oxygen consumption and ATP synthesis rates (Banati et al  2014). However, using the TSPO global knockout mice, it was subsequently demonstrated that activation of microglia after neuronal injury does not require TSPO, though microglia isolated from TSPO knockouts have altered oxygen consumption and ATP synthesis rates (Banati et al  2014). However, using the TSPO global knockout mice, it was subsequently demonstrated that activation of microglia after neuronal injury does not require TSPO, though microglia isolated from TSPO knockouts have altered oxygen consumption and ATP synthesis rates (Banati et al  2014). However, using the TSPO global knockout mice, it was subsequently demonstrated that activation of microglia after neuronal injury does not require TSPO, though microglia isolated from TSPO knockouts have altered oxygen consumption and ATP synthesis rates (Banati et al  2014). However, using the TSPO global knockout mice, it was subsequently demonstrated that activation of microglia after neuronal injury does not require TSPO, though microglia isolated from TSPO knockouts have altered oxygen consumption and ATP synthesis rates (Banati et al  2014). weaker affinity) relative to all DPC conditions (Table S1, Figure S3), whereas the change in the high-affinity binding transition phase KappTr1 was negligible. At the same time, these bacterial homologs, although determined in a more native-like lipidic cubic phase environment, have low homology to mTSPO; the sequence identity is only 25% (bcTSPOX-ray) and 30% (rsTSPOX-ray). The RosettaMembrane score function combines physical and knowledge-based score terms that evaluate a given protein conformation (e.g. The mTSPORosettaCM model obtained from multiple template modeling was considered the final mTSPORosettaCM model and used for further analysis. TSPO is a target for imaging ligandsDespite the controversies surrounding TSPO function, TSPO has become a target for cancer imaging via positron emission tomography (PET). The mTSPORosettaCM model differed more strongly from the experimental NOE data: 16 residues had an average distance deviation of more than 2Å. Those residues are located in helices III, IV, and V which adopt alternative backbone and side chain conformations in our mTSPORosettaCM model. The Pro45–Pro45 site is sequence-conserved between mammalian and bacterial TSPOs while the other two sites are not (compare with Fig. The Pro45–Pro45 site is sequence-conserved between mammalian and bacterial TSPOs while the other two sites are not (compare with Fig. Docking of PK11195 into the mTSPORosettaCM model (Figures S6C and S7E) converged to a low-energy ligand conformation that was however, different from both of the bcTSPOX-ray and mTSPONMR structures. Computational docking models of VUIIS8310 with mTSPORosettaCM and mTSPONMR-opt agreed qualitatively with the ΔCS data and are shown in Fig. The first transition phase (Tr1) observed in the fluorescence ligand titration experiment is sensitive to temperature and detergent conditions, and could represent nonspecific interactions of PK11195 with the detergent micelle. The second transition phase (Tr2) in the fluorescence binding curve coincides with the transition observed in the NMR titration experiment (i.e. There are three main sources of possible distortions for a multispan helical membrane protein. The mTSPORosettaCM model was able to produce meaningful binding poses for the PET tracer molecule VUIIS8310, which agrees with our ΔCS data. We found that VUIIS8310 occupies a site that partially overlaps with the position of PK11195 but penetrates deeper into TSPO to maximize the overlap between its conjugated ring system and the indole side-chain of W53. We attribute this to remaining micelle-induced energetic frustrations in the mTSPONMR structure that cannot be remodeled by simple energy minimization. While this ancient protein has been proposed to be involved in alternative biological processes such as heme and porphyrin transport (Taketani et al  1995; Verma et al  1987) and oxidative stress sensing (Ginter et al  2013), TSPO’s function remains poorly understood. While this ancient protein has been proposed to be involved in alternative biological processes such as heme and porphyrin transport (Taketani et al  1995; Verma et al  1987) and oxidative stress sensing (Ginter et al  2013), TSPO’s function remains poorly understood. While this ancient protein has been proposed to be involved in alternative biological processes such as heme and porphyrin transport (Taketani et al  1995; Verma et al  1987) and oxidative stress sensing (Ginter et al  2013), TSPO’s function remains poorly understood. While this ancient protein has been proposed to be involved in alternative biological processes such as heme and porphyrin transport (Taketani et al  1995; Verma et al  1987) and oxidative stress sensing (Ginter et al  2013), TSPO’s function remains poorly understood. Despite the controversies regarding its biological function, mammalian TSPO is an attractive target for imaging molecules and possibly cancer therapeutics. Using computational docking and chemical shift perturbations, we have also proposed a model for the interaction of mTSPO with the novel PET imaging ligand VUIIS8310. It has been found that TSPO is ubiquitously expressed in all human tissues, but is especially elevated in steroidogenic tissues and in certain pathological tissues such as cancer tumors and inflamed brain matter (Batarseh and Papadopoulos 2010; Ching et al  2012). This leads to increased ligand burial in mTSPO (the solvent-accessible surface area of PK11195 is ~ 640 Å2 compared to ~ 710 Å2 in bcTSPO) and could explain the higher affinity of PK11195 to mTSPO which was reported to be a thousand-fold higher than the affinity to bcTSPO (Frison et al  2017). For bcTSPOX-Ray, helices I and II contribute to the main dimerization interface. The primary dimer interface for rsTSPOX-Ray is formed by helices I and III. For each titration point, TSPO tryptophan residues were excited at 290 nm and the fluorescence emission maximum was measured at 350 nm (spectral scan from 300 nm to 400 nm) on a Horiba Jobin–Yvon Fluoromax-3™ spectrofluorimeter. The solvent for membrane proteins is its lipid membrane mimetic (i.e. Moreover, TSPO-mediated cholesterol translocation has been proposed to be the rate-limiting step in progesterone synthesis in mitochondria, where cholesterol is further metabolized to steroid hormones (Lacapère and Papadopoulos 2003). Several studies have been conducted to probe the pharmacological or biochemical properties of TSPO involvement in hormone metabolism and apoptosis (Li and Papadopoulos 1998; Taketani et al  1995; Verma et al  1987). Several studies have been conducted to probe the pharmacological or biochemical properties of TSPO involvement in hormone metabolism and apoptosis (Li and Papadopoulos 1998; Taketani et al  1995; Verma et al  1987). Several studies have been conducted to probe the pharmacological or biochemical properties of TSPO involvement in hormone metabolism and apoptosis (Li and Papadopoulos 1998; Taketani et al  1995; Verma et al  1987). The spectra were processed with NMRPipe (Delaglio et al  1995) and analyzed using Sparky (Lee et al  2015). The spectra were processed with NMRPipe (Delaglio et al  1995) and analyzed using Sparky (Lee et al  2015). 