Changes in GlyT1 activity have been shown to alter both glutamatergic transmission (Martina et al , 2005) and long term potentiation (LTP) (Martina et al , 2004), in a manner that is hypothesized to depend on the role of glycine as a co-agonist of NMDA receptors. Across a population of thirteen cells, we found that the peak EPSP magnitude measured during 10 Hz AP-EPSP pairs, decreases to the same peak magnitude as EPSPs alone at 10 Hz (Fig. We also studied the effects of taurine, a lower affinity (yet specific) glycine receptor agonist, on RDE. In this case, one would expect RDE to be less pronounced under voltage clamp, which under the assumption of good space clamp, should eliminate shunting effects. Across a population of 7 cells, we found that the mean excitability significantly increases (Fig. Across a population of 12 cells, the mean peak EPSP magnitude measured for 10 Hz AP-EPSP pairs was reduced to that of the EPSP alone at 10 Hz (Fig. 3c), co-application of strychnine and amoxapine occludes RDE, such that the mean peak EPSP magnitude arising from EPSPs alone at 10 Hz is increased to the same magnitude measured for AP-EPSP pairs at 10 Hz (Fig. 5c, strychnine blocks open GlyRs and lowers input conductance by the same amount, independent of the presence or absence of amoxapine (Fig. These results suggest that the second messenger cascade triggering RDE may be calcium mediated or could be calcium alone. Together, our data suggest that the effects of BAPTA are like those of bath-applied amoxapine or exogenous glycine: a proportion of GlyRs are open and no longer close in response to high-frequency trains of AP-EPSP pairs. 6b, c; blue; average depression = 0.56 ± 0.006), as shown in a sample trace in Fig. When CPs were repeated at 1 Hz, however, no significant depression was observed (Fig. In contrast, even in response to high-frequency (10 Hz) CPs, both amoxapine (Fig. 6c; white; average depression = 1.1 ± 0.01) prevented LTD. In contrast, the ratio of peak EPSP magnitude during CPs relative to baseline magnitude was strongly correlated with the amount of observed LTD (correlation: R=-0.7, dof=8, p=0.008; the negative value of R indicates that larger normalized EPSPs lead to more LTD). Our results demonstrate a previously undetected form of modulation of glycinergic transmission in the hippocampus. After the dissection, slices were allowed to recover at 35°C for thirty minutes in a holding chamber and were brought back to room temperature for at least thirty minutes before recording. After the dissection, slices were allowed to recover at 35°C for thirty minutes in a holding chamber and were brought back to room temperature for at least thirty minutes before recording. The mechanistic basis of RDESeveral lines of evidence suggest that RDE is caused by the closure of postsynaptic GlyRs, a percentage of which are open in the quiescent slice. The slices were perfused in heated (35°C) and equilibrated with 95% O2, 5% CO2 ACSF in a separate holding chamber (Warner Instruments, Harnden, CT) mounted on a microscope stage. The slices were perfused in heated (35°C) and equilibrated with 95% O2, 5% CO2 ACSF in a separate holding chamber (Warner Instruments, Harnden, CT) mounted on a microscope stage. The receptors are abundant in stratum pyramidale and proximal stratum radiatum (Danglot et al , 2004), a location through which excitatory signals would pass, and therefore be affected by the shunt from these receptors. Given that RDE has a rapid offset (< 100 ms) and that bath-applied glycine prevents RDE, reduced GlyR sensitivity seems a more likely explanation than receptor trafficking. This result suggests that upregulation of transport (Model 3) at presynaptic glycinergic terminals may also contribute to RDE. Solutions and DrugsFor both the dissection and experiments, the slices were bathed in ACSF (in mM 126 NaCl, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 2 MgCl, 26 NaHCO3, 10 Glucose, 2.5 KCl and 2 CaCl2). The fact that 20 mM BAPTA blocks RDE suggests that postsynaptic Ca2+ may be involved; however, BAPTA would also block release from the postsynaptic cell, leaving open the possibility that effects of feedback from the pyramidal cell is involved. Three pieces of evidence suggest that RDE may contribute to the frequency-dependent LTD we observed. Wittenberg and Wang (2006) did the “anti-causal” recordings without blocking inhibition (whereas we blocked GABAergic inhibition using bicuculline). Other possible candidates include endogenous cannabinoids anandamide (AEA) and 2-AG which are known to block GlyRs (Lozovaya et al , 2005), and AEA which also directly up-regulates glycine transport (Pearlman et al , 2003). It is important to note that our study was carried out in animals aged P14- P21. ElectrophysiologyPyramidal neurons in CA1 were identified visually and recorded with whole-cell patch clamp recording techniques using infrared differential-interference contrast (DIC) visualization (Axioskop 2 FS; Carl Zeiss Inc., Germany). Recordings were made using borosilicate microelectrodes (3-5 MΩ) (1.0 OD, 0.75 ID, Sutter Instruments, Novato, CA) filled with intracellular recording solution. Stimulus intensity, in the range of 5-35 μA for 500 μs, was adjusted to induce EPSPs with a magnitude of 2-4 mV and limited EPSP failures. Stimulus intensity, in the range of 5-35 μA for 500 μs, was adjusted to induce EPSPs with a magnitude of 2-4 mV and limited EPSP failures. Stimulus intensity, in the range of 5-35 μA for 500 μs, was adjusted to induce EPSPs with a magnitude of 2-4 mV and limited EPSP failures. Stimulus intensity, in the range of 5-35 μA for 500 μs, was adjusted to induce EPSPs with a magnitude of 2-4 mV and limited EPSP failures. To measure the magnitude of the second EPSP, the single EPSP alone measured at 10 Hz was subtracted from the second of the EPSPs to correct for the fact that the second EPSP occurs before the first EPSP ends. The duration of the pressure pulses were adjusted (50-300 ms) so that the evoked current did not lead to action potentials. The duration of the pressure pulses were adjusted (50-300 ms) so that the evoked current did not lead to action potentials. The duration of the pressure pulses were adjusted (50-300 ms) so that the evoked current did not lead to action potentials. Glycine evoked currents were measured (1) when the cell was at rest, (2) 50 ms following 25 repetitions of 10 Hz AP-EPSP pairs (20 ms interval between the AP and EPSP), and (3) 50 ms following 25 repetitions of 1 Hz AP-EPSP pairs (20 ms interval between the AP and EPSP). Glycine evoked currents were measured (1) when the cell was at rest, (2) 50 ms following 25 repetitions of 10 Hz AP-EPSP pairs (20 ms interval between the AP and EPSP), and (3) 50 ms following 25 repetitions of 1 Hz AP-EPSP pairs (20 ms interval between the AP and EPSP). Glycine evoked currents were measured (1) when the cell was at rest, (2) 50 ms following 25 repetitions of 10 Hz AP-EPSP pairs (20 ms interval between the AP and EPSP), and (3) 50 ms following 25 repetitions of 1 Hz AP-EPSP pairs (20 ms interval between the AP and EPSP). The three conditions were interleaved, with 20 seconds between trials.For LTD experiments, baseline EPSP magnitude was measured at 0.1 Hz for 10 min. Changes in the post-conditioning pulse EPSP magnitude were measured at 0.1 Hz for 20-30 minutes, beginning immediately following the conditioning pulses. Changes in the post-conditioning pulse EPSP magnitude were measured at 0.1 Hz for 20-30 minutes, beginning immediately following the conditioning pulses. The liquid junction potential was not corrected; calculations found it to be approximately 10 mV. All data was analyzed after recordings using custom protocols written in Matlab (The MathWorks, Natick, MA).All population data were expressed as the mean ± SEM. All data was analyzed after recordings using custom protocols written in Matlab (The MathWorks, Natick, MA).All population data were expressed as the mean ± SEM. All data was analyzed after recordings using custom protocols written in Matlab (The MathWorks, Natick, MA).All population data were expressed as the mean ± SEM. Statistical tests were paired t-tests, a t-test followed by a correlation coefficient calculation, an analysis of variance (ANOVA) or t-test, followed by Bonferroni’s multiple comparison tests, as indicated in the text. Characterizing glycine receptors (GlyRs) in hippocampusWe studied the basic properties of postsynaptic glycine receptors (GlyRs) known to be present in hippocampus (Racca et al , 1998; Chattipakorn and McMahon, 2002). The degree of change in the peak EPSP magnitude was dependent on the concentration of strychnine, with concentrations as low as 100 nM completely blocking the glycinergic shunting of the EPSP (Fig. While the source of glycine in the hippocampus remains unclear, calbindin-, calretinin-, and parvalbumin-positive interneurons in the CA1 are hypothesized to co-release GABA and glycine (Danglot et al , 2004), which are carried by the same vesicular transporter (Wojcik et al , 2006). 