In terms of molecular mechanism, recent reports indicated that the TCR-NFAT signaling, a key T cell activation pathway, also governs the T cell exhaustion program.25 Enhanced NFAT activation up-regulates the expression of exhaustion drivers TOX and NR4As.3,6 Here we found that compared with the transferred TEa cells in Balb/c skin-transplanted B6 mice, TEa cells in CB6F1 mice have increased expression of NFATc1, TOX, NR4A1, and NR4A2. Adoptively transferred TEa cells in B6 recipients responded to Balb/c skin transplant and were not exhausted. All animal experiments in this study were approved by the Houston Methodist Animal Care Committee in accordance with institutional animal care and use guidelines. Expression of transcription factors was determined by using the Foxp3/Transcription Factor Staining Buffer Set (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Samples were then sent to Novogene Inc for low-input total RNA library construction using the SMRTER kit lib (Takara Inc Mountain View). The genes with RNA Integrity number (≥5.8) were further sequenced on the Illumina HiSeq platform. The P values of skin-graft survival were determined with the Mann-Whitney test. 3.2 |Anti-male CD8+ T cells display an exhaustive phenotype in female recipients that received large but not small male skin graftsTo study the T cell states correlated with transplant outcome, female B6 recipients were transplanted with either large or small male tail skins, followed by flow cytometric analysis of anti-male H-2Db HY Uty tetramer+ CD8+ T cells in peripheral blood or spleens. Tetramer+ CD8+ splenocytes in both skin-graft groups display an activated CD62L−CD44+ T cell phenotype (Figure 2C, contour plots and right bar graph), but their frequencies were significantly lower in the large skin-graft group (Figure 2C, left bar graph). It remains unclear whether T cell exhaustion naturally occurs in response to transplant.10 We found that IRF4 deletion leads to transplant tolerance by inducing an exhaustion-like phenotype of T cells, evident by their high PD-1 expression and impaired cytokine production.11,12 Miller et al13 demonstrated that CD154 blockade plus donor-specific transfusion, an experimental approach to transplant tolerance, also induces a PD-1hi phenotype of alloreactive T cells. Expression of Granzyme B, RORγt, IL-4, and IL-17A in TEa cells were not significantly different between 2 groups (Figure S3C).At 30 days post cell transfer, the majority of TEa cells in spleens of CB6F1 mice were CD62L−CD44+, whereas TEa cells in skin-graft recipients were heterogeneous in the expression of CD62L and CD44 (Figure S4A). Moreover, compared with TEa cells from skin-graft recipients, TEa cells from CB6F1 mice expressed significantly higher levels of TOX, NR4A1, NR4A2, LAG-3, TIM-3, TIGIT, CD39, and 2B4 (Figure 5C, Figure S4B).TEa cells were isolated from spleens of CB6F1 mice and skin-graft B6 recipients at 30 days post initial TEa cell transfer and then were further adoptively transferred into B6.Rag1−/− mice. We demonstrated previously that transplant of Balb/c hearts (larger than the skin grafts) into B6 mice effectively activated both endogenous alloreactive T cells and the transferred TEa cells and did not induce T cell exhaustion/dysfunction. Indeed, we had to delete a transcription factor IRF4 to induce T cell dysfunction and transplant tolerance.11,12 Interestingly, dramatically increasing graft size (eg, transplant of 2 kidneys plus 2 hearts in 1 recipient) or reducing alloreactive T cell frequency promotes the acceptance of MHC-mismatched grafts.20,21 It would be informative to know whether these conditions can induce T cell exhaustion in fully MHC-mismatched transplant. 