Rab27A overexpression is variously reported to inhibit or enhance regulated exocytosis (Desnos et al , 2003; Johnson et al , 2005; Menasche et al , 2003; Yi et al , 2002). During the maturation period the granules can undergo regulated exocytosis (Tooze et al , 1991). This has been used previously to follow immature granules in PC12 cells (Rudolf et al , 2001). Mutation of Rab27A in humans results in Griscelli syndrome (Menasche et al , 2000) and loss of functional Rab27A in ashen mice is associated with defects in melanosome trafficking, defects in the exocytosis of lytic granules by cytotoxic T lymphocytes leading to immunodeficiency, and impaired release of insulin from pancreatic β-cells leading to glucose intolerance (Haddad et al , 2001; Kasai et al , 2005; Stinchcombe et al , 2004; Wilson et al , 2000). Following the bleaching of an area of the Golgi complex, fluorescence recovery of this ARF-1-EGFP occurred with a t1/2 of 44s and was almost complete (fractional recovery of 87.5%) within the recorded timeframe of the experiments (Fig 4A,E). Following the bleaching of an area of the Golgi complex, fluorescence recovery of this ARF-1-EGFP occurred with a t1/2 of 44s and was almost complete (fractional recovery of 87.5%) within the recorded timeframe of the experiments (Fig 4A,E). the first post-bleaching datapoint) was greater than seen in the ppANF-EGFP-transfected cells, consistent with a greater cytosolic component of recovery. The recovery of EGFP-Rab3A was more similar to that of the ARF1-EGFP with extensive although not complete recovery with a t1/2 of 32s. It was also reported that geldanamycin could block neurotransmitter release from synaptosomes. In order to see whether there was a similar effect on the release of secretory granule contents from PC12 cells, we assayed ATP-stimulated release of exogenously-expressed human growth hormone (hGH) from PC12 cells pre-incubated for 1h prior to stimulation with varying concentrations of the inhibitor (see Fig. To rule out these possibilities, the effects of the inhibitor on the well characterised Hsp90-dependent nuclear translocation of glucocorticoid receptor (GCR) were determined. To rule out these possibilities, the effects of the inhibitor on the well characterised Hsp90-dependent nuclear translocation of glucocorticoid receptor (GCR) were determined. To rule out these possibilities, the effects of the inhibitor on the well characterised Hsp90-dependent nuclear translocation of glucocorticoid receptor (GCR) were determined. When membrane-associated, they may become GTP-bound through interaction with specific guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs). Cells were loaded with the Ca2+ indicator X-Rhod for measurement of changes in intracellular Ca2+ concentration resulting from stimulation to confirm that the cells responded to 300μM ATP. Cells were loaded with the Ca2+ indicator X-Rhod for measurement of changes in intracellular Ca2+ concentration resulting from stimulation to confirm that the cells responded to 300μM ATP. Cells were loaded with the Ca2+ indicator X-Rhod for measurement of changes in intracellular Ca2+ concentration resulting from stimulation to confirm that the cells responded to 300μM ATP. During stimulation, ppANF-labelled granules in the cell periphery but not those in the cell interior were seen to disappear abruptly often between successive images (Fig 7B), indicating exocytosis of these granules. During stimulation, ppANF-labelled granules in the cell periphery but not those in the cell interior were seen to disappear abruptly often between successive images (Fig 7B), indicating exocytosis of these granules. During stimulation, ppANF-labelled granules in the cell periphery but not those in the cell interior were seen to disappear abruptly often between successive images (Fig 7B), indicating exocytosis of these granules. At this time immature secretory granules in PC12 cells can under go regulated exocytosis (Tooze et al , 1991). In the GDP-bound form, Rabs may be vulnerable to extraction to the cytosol, a process involving guanine nucleotide dissociation inhibitor (GDIs) (Luan et al , 1999). Perhaps Rab3A becomes segregated to a stable multimolecular ‘rab domain’ such as that reported for Rab5 and Rab9 (Ganley et al , 2004; Zerial and McBride, 2001), and this domain is resistant to disassembly due to positive feedback activation of Rab GEF. Another interpretation is that separate mechanisms exist for Rab-extraction during rapid cycling, and Rab-extraction where a donor membrane compartment meets its target membrane. Under this interpretation the Hsp90-dependent mechanism would control only Rab-extraction at the target membrane. Removal of the Rab during cycling may involve the removal of the Rab alone, while removal of the Rab at the target membrane is likely to require the disassembly of Rab-containing complexes. In contrast, one study on Rab3A in synaptosomes observed that after stimulation GDP-loaded Rab3A remained membrane-associated (Stahl et al , 1994). The regulation and dynamics of Rab3A in neurones have been partially characterised but less is known about Rab27A. The extraction process is proposed to involve a GDIα–Hsp90 chaperone complex (GCC) comprising GDIα, the Hsp90/Hsc70 chaperone system, and the cysteine-string protein (CSP) (Sakisaka et al , 2002) and inhibition of Hsp90 has been shown to inhibit dissociation of Rab3A and exocytosis in brain synaptosomes. Individual Rab subtypes characteristically associate with specific membrane compartments, and interact with specific effector(s) to regulate trafficking between compartments (Pereira-Leal and Seabra, 2000). Importantly, recent work has established that Rab3A and Rab27A are likely to be the only two Rabs that function in regulated exocytosis in this cell type and that both contribute in a non-redundant manner to secretory granule exocytosis (Tsuboi and Fukuda, 2006). Secretory granules are distributed throughout the cytosol in PC12 cells and have an approximately 10-fold larger diameter than synaptic vesicles (Warashina, 1985; Willig et al , 2006). The rat Rab27A sequence was amplified from the PC12 cDNA by PCR and then inserted in frame into the pEGFP-C1, pECFP-C1 and pmRFP-C1 vectors to generate mammalian expression constructs for Rab27A, N-terminally tagged with EGFP, ECFP and mRFP. The ppANF-EGFP (Burke et al , 1997), ARF1-EGFP (Haynes et al , 2005) and glucocorticoid receptor-EGFP (Galigniana et al , 1998) fusion constructs were as described previously. The ppANF-EGFP (Burke et al , 1997), ARF1-EGFP (Haynes et al , 2005) and glucocorticoid receptor-EGFP (Galigniana et al , 1998) fusion constructs were as described previously. The ppANF-EGFP (Burke et al , 1997), ARF1-EGFP (Haynes et al , 2005) and glucocorticoid receptor-EGFP (Galigniana et al , 1998) fusion constructs were as described previously. Transfection mixes consisting of 3μl of Lipofectamine 2000 reagent (Invitrogen, Paisley, UK) per μg plasmid in 100μl Optimem 1 media (Gibco) were prepared and incubated at room temperature for 20 min before being added dropwise to the cells. Five hours following their addition, transfection mixes were removedand replaced with normal growth medium. Coverslips were then washed twice in PBS, and exposed to primary antibody in PBS containing 0.3% BSA and 0.1% Triton-X-100 (PBT) for 1h. Primary antibodies, mouse anti-Rab3A (Transduction Labs, Cowley, UK), rabbit anti-secretogranin II (Abcam, Cambridge, UK), and rabbit anti-CSP (Chamberlain et al , 1996) were used at 1:400, 1:100 or 1:400 dilutions respectively. Confocal microscopyConfocal microscopy following immunocytochemistry was carried out on a Leica TCS-SP microscope (Leica Microsystems, Heidelberg, Germany) using a 63x oil immersion objective with a 1.4 numerical aperture and pinhole set to airy1. To determine the rate of fluorescence recovery, fluorescence in these regions was measured over time, and then normalised with respect to corresponding total cellular fluorescence at each individual time point to correct for bleaching during low power laser excitation. Each well was transfected with 0.5μg of the pXGH5 hGH-encoding vector either alone, or combined with other vectors as detailed in the text. 48 hours post transfection, cells were assayed for hGH release (Graham et al , 2000). The data for hGH secretion were calculated as a percentage of total hGH for each well and are presented as mean ± SEM. The data for hGH secretion were calculated as a percentage of total hGH for each well and are presented as mean ± SEM. The data for hGH secretion were calculated as a percentage of total hGH for each well and are presented as mean ± SEM. It was not possible to carry out a similar experiment to determine the localisation of endogenous Rab27A because antibodies were not available. 