PAFR gene expression pattern in ovarian cancer cell lines and tissue specimensPAFR expression levels were significantly higher in 9 of the 13 cancer cell lines and exhibited up to 10,000-fold increase. 2A may be due to a splice variant of PAFR or post-translational modification (33).Immunohistochemical staining on the tissue micro-arrays containing different histological types of pre-operative tissue specimens revealed that PAFR protein expression was significantly higher in ovarian cancer patients (n=205) compared to that of benign ovarian tissue specimens (n=35). In addition, PAF-induced cell proliferation in these cancer cells was almost completely inhibited by the administration of 100 μM ginkgolide B and 1:50 dilution of PAFR antibody, compared to the treatment with PAF alone, or PAF plus IgG control. Using immune blot analysis, we found that the siRNA-probe treated cells significantly decreased PAFR protein expression (Fig. Furthermore, we also found that transient PAFR gene-knockdown significantly decreased cell proliferation up to 60% (p<0.001), compared to the cancer cells treated with the negative siRNA probe (Fig. The nonspecific inhibitor A25 showed medium inhibition on all these targets, except for EGFR where a strong inhibitory effect was observed. We demonstrated that blocking PAFR by using ginkgolide B and specific antibody significantly (p<001) reduced the cancer cell invasion, which was induced by PAF treatment (Fig.6DE). We hypothesize that ovarian cancer cell lines and tissue specimens with different PAFR gene expression would be a valuable model system to investigate the regulatory mechanisms of PAF-PAFR with its associated signal pathways in ovarian cancer progression. Here, we demonstrated that over expression of PAFR gene (10 to 10000-fold) was found in 8 of 11 (73%) non-mucinous types of ovarian cancer cell lines and 57 of 76 (75%) non-mucinous types of ovarian tissue specimens (Fig. We also found that PAFR protein was over expressed in ovarian cancer cell lines and cancer patients, but varied across different histological types (Fig. In this study, we have characterized the PAFR gene and protein expression in different subtypes of ovarian cancer cell lines and tissue specimens collected from different histological subtypes of ovarian cancers. Surrounding carbohydrates may significantly block the active biological factors such as PAF and TNF-α from entering the mucinous tumor cells to stimulate PAFR gene expression(37, 38), which only partially explains the decreased level of PAFR expression in mucinous ovarian tumor patients. Our data showed that only the PAFR-positive cells respond to PAF and stimulate cancer cell growth and invasion (Figs.3, 6), while no effect was found in the PAFR-negative cells such as immortalized HOSE cells, mucinous cancer cells and PAFR-knockdown cells (Fig. Interestingly, all eight molecular targets were activated by PAF treatment and inactivated by ginkgolide B treatment (Fig.5A). For example, PAFR activated MAP kinase and induced epidermal cell proliferation via EGFR (25) and PAF induced activation of tyrosine phosphorylation of FAK and Paxillin in human endothelial cells (24). Here we provide additional evidence that PAF simultaneously induced multiple protein phosphorylation including EGFR, Src, FAK and Paxillin and the activation is dependent on PAFR gene expression in ovarian cancer cells. In this study, we measured the protein expression of PI3K and cyclin D1 as markers for cell proliferation and MMP2/MMP9 for call invasion to confirm these cellular functions were induced by PAF and reversibly inhibited by PAFR antagonist ginkgolide B, PAFR antibody and Src inhibitor PP2. Phospholipids mediator PAF can activate PAFR and initiate multiple downstream signal pathways, specifically through Src/FAK and the downstream targets such as PI3K, in cancer cell proliferation and MMP2/MMP9 in cancer invasion. Kinase inhibitor PP2 was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO), A25 and LY294002 from Calbiochem (San Diego, CA) and erlotinib from LC laboratories® (Woburn, MA), respectively. Tissue SamplesParaffin-embedded tissue was assembled from specimens collected and archived from patients who had undergone primary surgery at Brigham and Women’s Hospital (Boston, MA). After 72 hours of treatment, 10μl of the MTT dye solution was added to each well and the plates were incubated at 37°C for 4 hours in a humidified chamber. One hour after the addition of the solubilization solution, the content of the wells were mixed and read by the 96-well plate scanning spectrophotometer (μQuant) and quantitative software (KC-junior, Bio-Tek Instruments, Inc.) at an absorbance of 630 nm for quantitative analysis. Data was collected from at least two separate experiments and 8 repeats were performed for each treatment. The 7300-Real-Time PCR System software was used to monitor the amplification process and determine the threshold cycle (Ct) for each reaction. 70μl of each of the eight diluted samples was added to determine the standard curve for each of the 8-plex markers. At the completion of incubation, the slides were washed three times with 90 μl of TBST buffer and then quickly rinsed in distilled water. Statistical AnalysisFor the immune staining intensity and quantification, the average was derived from the individual intensity score for each subject and the mean value per subject was used to calculate the mean value for each group. 