Their importance for optimal immune function is underscored by the large enrichment of disease-associated polymorphisms within their sequences2. Their importance for optimal immune function is underscored by the large enrichment of disease-associated polymorphisms within their sequences2. This suggests that the enhancer functions to accelerate initiation of Bcl11b expression, but is not required for its maintenance.Due to its ability to regulate the timing of Bcl11b activation independently of expression magnitude, the Bcl11b timing enhancer enabled investigation of the functional impact of altered timing control during lymphocyte development. Mice with the timing enhancer removed from both Bcl11b alleles have roughly half the total number of ILC2 cells compared to wild-type mice41. Mice with the timing enhancer removed from both Bcl11b alleles have roughly half the total number of ILC2 cells compared to wild-type mice41. Mice with the timing enhancer removed from both Bcl11b alleles have roughly half the total number of ILC2 cells compared to wild-type mice41. Mice with the timing enhancer removed from both Bcl11b alleles have roughly half the total number of ILC2 cells compared to wild-type mice41. Mice with the timing enhancer removed from both Bcl11b alleles have roughly half the total number of ILC2 cells compared to wild-type mice41. Similarly, mice lacking the Bcl11b timing enhancer have a reduced number of thymocytes (Pease et al  unpublished), indicating that proper control of Bcl11b activation timing is important for specifying T-cell population sizes.Collectively, these findings provide evidence for an endogenous enhancer that behaves according to the predictions of the timing enhancer model. It is able to explain how time delays over long timescales could be controlled where a trans-factor model is insufficient. Therefore, based on the insights that we have gained above, we define a list of distinguishing functional features to identify putative timing enhancers in the lymphocyte literature:Timing enhancers, when disrupted, primarily lead to changes in the fraction of cells that express their target genes in an all-or-none fashion. This property links timing enhancers to stable chromatin modifications associated with epigenetic states, such as DNA methylation or histone H3K27-trimethylation. Here, we first provide a definition of timing enhancers that distinguishes them from other types of enhancer control. Flow cytometry shows how perturbation of these cis-elements can primarily affect population fractions without altering magnitude, a key prediction of a timing enhancer mechanism. In addition to these examples, we also provide a more comprehensive list of candidate timing enhancers that we have identified from the literature (Table 1). In addition to these examples, we also provide a more comprehensive list of candidate timing enhancers that we have identified from the literature (Table 1). Within this system, there is evidence of multiple cis-regulatory elements that work, either singly or in combination, as timing enhancers for Cd8 activation during the DN to DP transition. According to this model, DP thymocytes reduce Cd8 expression after positive selection to enter a CD4+CD8low state. Though not an enhancer, we include it in this review as it represents a paradigmatic example that can inform work in other systems. Second, by inducing S4 deletion before or after the silencing stage77, it was found that S4 is important for initiating Cd4 silencing during CD8+ lineage commitment, but is dispensable for maintaining a silent state after it has been established. Second, by inducing S4 deletion before or after the silencing stage77, it was found that S4 is important for initiating Cd4 silencing during CD8+ lineage commitment, but is dispensable for maintaining a silent state after it has been established. Together, these studies suggest that S4 acts as a “timing silencer” that generates a time delay in Cd4 silencing in response to withdrawal of TCR signaling. This suggests that CNS3 may act as a timing enhancer to control the kinetics of Foxp3 activation in nTregs and iTregs. For example, when CNS-4 or CNS+20 are removed from the IFNG locus, a smaller fraction of Th1 polarized cells will express IFN-γ following stimulation; however, those cells that do activate IFNG express it at normal levels86. For example, when CNS-4 or CNS+20 are removed from the IFNG locus, a smaller fraction of Th1 polarized cells will express IFN-γ following stimulation; however, those cells that do activate IFNG express it at normal levels86. For example, when CNS-4 or CNS+20 are removed from the IFNG locus, a smaller fraction of Th1 polarized cells will express IFN-γ following stimulation; however, those cells that do activate IFNG express it at normal levels86. For example, when CNS-4 or CNS+20 are removed from the IFNG locus, a smaller fraction of Th1 polarized cells will express IFN-γ following stimulation; however, those cells that do activate IFNG express it at normal levels86. How do timing enhancers induce all-or-none switches in the expression states of their target gene loci that occur many hours or days after induction of upstream trans-factors? This state can switch in an all-or-none manner to an active expressing state upon prolonged exposure to enhancer-bound transcription factors (Figure 5). The Bcl11b timing enhancer binds two transcription factors that have previously been shown to have pioneering functions, Gata3 and TCF-161,114. As transcription factors bind DNA rapidly, typically over timescales of seconds117–119, these slow, rate-limiting steps would most likely involve downstream chromatin modification or remodeling events. This view agrees with multiple studies on time courses of inducible pioneer factor binding and chromatin remodeling: upon transcription factor induction, binding sites for these factors became occupied rapidly48,113,120; however, chromatin opening events and activating histone modifications around these binding sites did not appear until hours or even days later. Transcription factors associated with timing enhancers can either recruit chromatin-modifying enzymes to remove histone modifications or directly displace nucleosomes upon binding.We found that this model, where histone methylation and chromatin compaction are coupled to each other, recapitulates essential dynamic properties of timed chromatin state switching, as observed for Bcl11b and other gene loci. A major finding from genome-wide association studies (GWAS) has been the identification of many disease-associated variants in putative enhancers128,129. Some of the strongest signals come from immune-related diseases, suggesting a significant role for genetic risk in immunopathology. It remains challenging to discern how enhancer-associated SNPs contribute to disease risk. It remains challenging to discern how enhancer-associated SNPs contribute to disease risk. It remains challenging to discern how enhancer-associated SNPs contribute to disease risk. It remains challenging to discern how enhancer-associated SNPs contribute to disease risk. This locus harbors a SNP associated with increased risk for Crohn’s disease and decreased risk for type 1 diabetes (T1D). This locus harbors a SNP associated with increased risk for Crohn’s disease and decreased risk for type 1 diabetes (T1D). This locus harbors a SNP associated with increased risk for Crohn’s disease and decreased risk for type 1 diabetes (T1D). This locus harbors a SNP associated with increased risk for Crohn’s disease and decreased risk for type 1 diabetes (T1D). This locus harbors a SNP associated with increased risk for Crohn’s disease and decreased risk for type 1 diabetes (T1D). This locus harbors a SNP associated with increased risk for Crohn’s disease and decreased risk for type 1 diabetes (T1D). A CaRE4 deletion results in increased polarization towards the Th17 fate under conditions of low IL-2. We note that a single enhancer can sometimes have both timing and amplitude control functions. We note that a single enhancer can sometimes have both timing and amplitude control functions. We note that a single enhancer can sometimes have both timing and amplitude control functions. We note that a single enhancer can sometimes have both timing and amplitude control functions. We note that a single enhancer can sometimes have both timing and amplitude control functions. Enhancer-deleted mice show decreased fractions of GARP+ Tregs in the thymus, spleen, and mesenteric lymph nodes. Enhancer-deleted mice show decreased fractions of GARP+ Tregs in the thymus, spleen, and mesenteric lymph nodes. Timing enhancers control the activation times of lineage-specifying genes in immune development and function26,40,51,65,78, and could consequently set the sizes and fractions of different immune cell lineages that emerge. Timing enhancers control the timing at which their target genes switch from a silent to an active chromatin state, which is then accessible to the transcriptional machinery. Timing enhancers can also be identified by the effects of their disruption on gene activation and target cell population fractions. The dual allelic reporter approach we used for Bcl11b could also be broadly used to reveal timing enhancer action for other genes. The dual allelic reporter approach we used for Bcl11b could also be broadly used to reveal timing enhancer action for other genes. Switching is initiated by the binding of trans-factors to the enhancer; however, even with full trans-factor induction and binding, switching does not occur rapidly. These elements typically contain multiple modules of transcription factor binding sites that are distributed over an extended genomic region. Thus, amplitude enhancers, by controlling bursting kinetics, would modulate mean expression levels of their target gene across a single population, and do so relatively rapidly in response to trans-factor binding. Amplitude enhancers are important for maintaining proper levels of expression after a gene locus has been activated, and we contrast them with timing enhancers here to distinguish between the functional properties of these regulatory elements; however, in keeping with the focus of this review, we do not discuss them further here. In this case, the strength of the timing enhancer not only affects the initial kinetics of gene induction, but also controls the final fraction of cells in the end population that stably express the target gene. Finally, despite subsequent work that has since shed light on the first two questions, it remained unresolved whether heterogeneity in gene activation is indeed caused by variability in the timing of gene activation via the direct action of enhancers or whether it may instead reflect variability in cell states that indirectly affect enhancer activity. Such an approach would build on earlier findings of dynamic enhancer control by demonstrating that an endogenous timing enhancer could act in cis to control the delay of a cell-fate specifying gene through epigenetic chromatin regulation. Using this approach, we found direct evidence for a cis-acting mechanism that generates a long, multi-day delay in the activation of Bcl11b, which encodes a transcription factor essential for T-cell lineage commitment54. 