More studies need to be completed to fully understand the implications of tedizolid on myelosuppression as the literature surrounding it being used for more than 6 days is limited.The ESTABLISH trials also noted a lower association of neurotoxicity, both peripheral and optic neuropathy, with the use of tedizolid compared to linezolid [62]. These properties give both medications an advantage over vancomycin, daptomycin, and the long acting lipoglycopeptides. 2.6.1Overview of the Market:Many drugs are currently available to treat SSTIs. Furthermore, oritavancin and dalbavancin, long acting lipoglycopeptides, are being marketed to emergency departments to bypass hospital admissions altogether. As additional studies are performed and the safety profile is better established, we see tedizolid as a promising antibiotic for conditions like ventilator-associated bacterial pneumonia. As a bactericidal agent, tedizolid may have more favorable outcomes than linezolid for the treatment of catheter-related bloodstream infections (linezolid was inferior to vancomycin in a phase 3 study) or to provide superior toxin inhibition than linezolid or clindamycin for life threatening conditions such as necrotizing fasciitis. Furthermore, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and doxycycline have questionable activity against Streptococcus pyogenes, another common cause of SSTIs [12,13]. First, lipoglycopeptides have activity against both MRSA and other common Gram-positive pathogens which cause SSTIs, including Streptococcus pyogenes [6, 8]. Second, both drugs have an incredibly long half-life and cannot be removed through dialysis [17, 18], making management of an acute allergic reaction very limited. However, two important differences should be noted. 2.6.4Therapeutic Target and Mechanism of ActionAs oxazolidinones, both tedizolid and linezolid have similar therapeutic targets and mechanisms of action. 2.6.4Therapeutic Target and Mechanism of ActionAs oxazolidinones, both tedizolid and linezolid have similar therapeutic targets and mechanisms of action. Specifically, both antibiotics inhibit protein synthesis by binding to the bacterial 23S ribosomal RNA of the 50S ribosomal subunit [25, 26]. 2.6.5Pharmacodynamics and MicrobiologyTedizolid, like linezolid, has potent activity against a variety of Gram-positive organisms, including MRSA, methicillin-susceptible S. aureus (MSSA), Streptococcus pyogenes, Streptococcus agalactiae, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Enterococcus species, and Coagulase-negative Staphylococci [31–33]. For example, a recent case study which showed successful treatment of a prosthetic joint infection using tedizolid [35].Tedizolid appears to have several pharmacodynamic advantages compared to linezolid. However, if organisms have both plasmid- and chromosomal mediated linezolid resistance, the organism has a high likelihood of also being resistant to tedizolid [37].Tedizolid also appears to retain excellent activity against other multidrug resistant Gram-positive bacteria. Such benefits may explain why tedizolid was identified as bactericidal, in an in vivo murine thigh infection model, unlike linezolid, which was identified as bacteriostatic [38].Antibiotic SusceptibilityThe in vitro MIC values of tedizolid have shown to have a 2 to 8 fold greater potency than linezolid in Gram-positive isolates [39]. When compared to vancomycin and daptomycin, tedizolid has shown either improved or equivalent potency [41]. The continued increase in incidence of multidrug resistant organisms (MDRO), such as MRSA, is considered a significant health threat by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and contributes to 2 million infections, 23,000 deaths, and up to $20 billion dollars in excess healthcare costs annually in the United States [3]. Important clinical implications, such as CYP450 interactions, drug-drug interactions, and important side effects are discussed in detail in the safety, tolerability, and toxicity section. Alejandro and colleagues compared the ESTABLISH-1 and ESTABLISH-2 trial dataset vs patients of Latino origin enrolled in those trials [54]. Ultimately 332 patients ended up in the tedizolid group, compared to 335 in the linezolid group, sufficiently powered to detect a 10% non-inferiority margin of efficacy. It is defined as a central nervous system disease with clinical manifestations that include altered mental status, ataxia, restlessness, lower extremity hyper-reflexia and diaphoresis which can progress to severe symptoms such as delirium, seizure, shock, coma, and death. 