In 1951, Cahan from Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center reporting on complete mediastinal lymphadenectomy found “that some patients experienced long-term survival when the positive regional lymph nodes also were removed”10. Thus, complete MLND has been considered the standard of care for lung cancer resection at most academic centers. Interestingly, there was no difference in the recurrence rates between the two cohorts. At a median followup of 47.5 months, there was no difference in overall or disease free survival except in patients with N1 or single station N2 in whom both overall and disease free survival was improved. Although their sampling methodology was a bit different than ours, they also found only a small number of patients (5.5%) had unsuspected mediastinal lymph node involvement after MLND. The protocol was approved by a central Institutional Review Board (IRB) and the IRB at each participating institution. By multivariate analysis, number of lymph node metastasis, type of nodal dissection (MLND vs MLNS), tumor size and pathological stage were all significant prognostic factors. At the time this study was performed, adjuvant chemotherapy was not the standard of care. This is a limitation of the study and potentially may have contributed to the lack of difference between the two arms of the trial. This study was conducted by many surgeons, all ABTS (or equivalent) certified and in many institutions (both community and academic), hence the results are generalizable and are not limited to a few specialized surgeons or centers. Since current preoperative staging cannot definitively identify patients with mediastinal lymph node involvement and patients with known hilar or mediastinal disease (N2) or those with T3 or T4 tumors may benefit from MLND as the pretest probability of N2 disease is higher, we still recommend that all patients with resectable NSCLC undergo MLND as MLND does not increased mortality or morbidity. The surgeon had the option of sampling by mediastinoscopy (2R/L, 4R/L and 7), thoracotomy or Video Assisted Thoracic Surgery (VATS). An 8% higher five-year survival in Arm 2 was considered clinically important. An 8% higher five-year survival in Arm 2 was considered clinically important. An 8% higher five-year survival in Arm 2 was considered clinically important. An additional comparison of local, regional, and distant recurrence was performed using a cumulative incidence approach. This methodology was used to account for competing risks when determining recurrence rates as only first sites of recurrence were recorded. Death was considered a competing event. All participating surgeons were general thoracic surgeons and diplomats of the American Board of Thoracic Surgery (ABTS) or equivalent. All participating surgeons were general thoracic surgeons and diplomats of the American Board of Thoracic Surgery (ABTS) or equivalent. All participating surgeons were general thoracic surgeons and diplomats of the American Board of Thoracic Surgery (ABTS) or equivalent. All analyses were performed on the 1023 (498 MLNS and 525 MLND) eligible subjects and additional intent-to-treat analyses were performed on all randomized subjects. Similar results were obtained on all randomized subjects; 5 year DFS was 68% (95% CI: 64%-73%) in the MLNS group and 67% (95% CI: 62%-71%) in the MLND group (p=0.89). An additional analysis was performed separately for T1 (p=0.83) and T2 (p=0.63) tumors and no differences were observed in DFS between treatment arms, see table 3. There was no difference between local (p=0.52), regional recurrence (p=0.10) or distant recurrence (p=0.76) between the two treatment arms. Similar results were observed for all randomized subjects (p=0.54, p=0.24, and p=0.77 for local, regional, and distant recurrence, respectively). After Evarts A. Graham's first successful pneumonectomy, surgical resection for lung cancer became popular in the United States. Although Davies in 1912 reported an anatomic lobectomy for lung cancer pneumonectomy remained the mainstay of therapy until it was challenged by Johnson8 and subsequently in a 1962 report by Shimkin9 lobectomy was shown to be acceptable therapy. 