Because members of the MAPK family (e.g. An alternative pathway involves Gab1, PI3K and Akt (12). Compared to the control plugs, which showed some EC invasion but only minimal vessel formation, FGF2-containing matrigel was characterized by intense EC invasion and vessel formation. Strong nuclear labeling of vascular ECs with an antibody to STAT5A was seen in 10 of these 35 tumors, contrasting with 2 out of 36 nonneoplastic tissues (P=0.012) (Fig. We were unable to detect any labeling with the phospho-specific STAT5 antibody in the small tumor samples present in the array slides. STAT1 is specifically activated in chondrocytes of thanatophoric dysplasia patients, which carry a constitutively active mutant of FGFR3 (15). Importantly, expression of STAT5A-DN abolishes FGF2- and FGF8b-stimulated activity, demonstrating that STAT5 activation is required for FGF-induced tube formation. To explore the role of Jak and Src in FGF-induced STAT activation, we tested whether pharmacologic inhibitors of these signaling molecules disrupt FGF-induced STAT activation. The involvement of Jak2 in FGF signaling is further supported by the observation that FGF2 or FGF8b-dependent STAT5 activation is blocked by a dominant negative Jak2 (Jak2 K→E mutant) (Fig. Src and Jak2 inhibitors block FGF2 and FGF8b-induced tube formationThe effect of Src and Jak2 inhibition on EC tube formation was examined to further explore the role of these tyrosine kinases in STAT5 signaling. The PI3K-Akt pathway has been linked to FGF induced cell survival although Akt does not appear to be involved in FGF signaling in our cell model (9, 12, 37). Src kinases can activate STATs and are established players in FGF signaling (18–21). For example, a constitutively active mutant FGFR3, which is responsible for thanatophoric dysplasia type II dwarfism, specifically activates STAT1, resulting in chondrocyte growth arrest (15). An attractive physiologic role for a network of divergent FGF signaling pathways might be that it generates numerous opportunities for crosstalk and integration with other signaling systems. Similar to our findings in ECs, Maciag’s group (20) attributed FGF1-induced fibroblast migration to Src activation, whereas mitogenesis was associated with the ERK1/2 pathway. Angiogenesis requires the orchestration of a sequence of events, which include migration and invasion of ECs into the stroma surrounding the pre-existing vessel, proliferation along the migration path and differentiation into a new vessel tube. Yahata and colleagues (48) found that VEGF-mediated STAT3 activation is essential for migration and tube formation in human dermal microvascular ECs. Naturally, the involvement of STATs in cytokine signaling and their role in regulating the immune system and hematopoiesis may require very selective inhibition and/or targeted delivery of therapeutic agents. Cell cultureTissue-specific, conditionally immortalized microvascular EC lines from H-2Kb-tsA58 mice [gifts from Isaiah J. Fidler (23)], which have previously been extensively characterized and shown to retain their EC characteristics, were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS at 33°C. Cell cultureTissue-specific, conditionally immortalized microvascular EC lines from H-2Kb-tsA58 mice [gifts from Isaiah J. Fidler (23)], which have previously been extensively characterized and shown to retain their EC characteristics, were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS at 33°C. Cell cultureTissue-specific, conditionally immortalized microvascular EC lines from H-2Kb-tsA58 mice [gifts from Isaiah J. Fidler (23)], which have previously been extensively characterized and shown to retain their EC characteristics, were maintained in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS at 33°C. Antibodies against Flag (F-3165) and β-actin (AC-74) were from Sigma (www.sigmaaldrich.com). Adenoviral plasmidsA constitutively active STAT5A mutant (STAT5A-CA) harboring a COOH-terminus Flag tag (pRKmSTAT5AHSFlag; generated from pRKmSTAT5AcFlag using site-directed mutagenesis by substituting His299 and Ser711 with arginine and phenylalanine, respectively) and a dominant-negative STAT5A mutant (STAT5A-DN) truncated from amino acid 713 to 793 (pRKmSTAT5A713Flag) were obtained from Steven J. Collins [Fred Hutchinson Cancer Center, Seattle, 6 WA; (24, 25)]. A fixed volume of a viral stock (25 pfu) was used to infect the target cells for 24 hr. Cells were starved (0.2% BSA DMEM, 24 hrs) and subsequently stimulated with FGFs (24 hr with indicated concentrations of FGF2 or FGF8b in starvation buffer). Protein concentration was measured by BCA assay and the lysates were mixed with 5x sample buffer. After transfer, the nitrocellulose membranes were blocked and incubated with antibodies against the phosphorylated proteins in Tris-buffered saline containing 5% nonfat dry milk plus 0.5% Tween 20, overnight at 4°C. Protein concentrations were determined by BCA assay and 1000 µg of cellular proteins were immunoprecipitated with pre-conjugated anti-STAT5A-PAA beads for 6–12 hrs at 4°C. Antibody complexes were washed 3 times with lysis buffer, then mixed with 2x sample buffer and boiled for 10 minutes. FGFs signal via four known receptor tyrosine kinases (FGFR1-4). Preparation of nuclear fractionsAfter treatment, the cells were washed twice with ice-cold PBS and scraped into fresh PBS. The cells were washed rapidly once with hypotonic buffer (10 mM HEPES, pH 7.9; 1.5 mM MgCl2; 10mM KCl; 0.2mM PMSF; 0.5mM DTT) and the supernatant discarded. The nuclei were then lysed and analyzed for p-STAT1, -3 and -5 as described for immunoblots. Immunofluorescent detection of p-STATs and p-Src in brain ECsBrain ECs were cultured in 8-well chamber slides for 24 hrs to a confluency of 40–50%. Briefly, a 12-well tissue culture plate was pre-chilled at −20°C and carefully coated with growth factor-reduced collagen (1.3 µg/ml; 500 µl/well; BD Biosciences, MA). A single scratch wound was introduced in the monolayer using a micropipette tip, and the medium was replaced with DMEM supplemented with FGF2 or FGF8b at 10 nM. Matrigel for the control group was supplemented with heparin, only. 