NADPH oxidase, a multiunit enzyme comprised of membrane bound and cytoplasmic components. These sections were collected on grids and counter-stained with Reynold’s lead citrate and uranyl acetate prior to examination using a Philips Tecnai Biotwin transmission electron microscope connected with a digital camera (Advanced Microscopy Techniques, software version 3.2). Data AnalysisData are expressed as mean±SEM. Two-group comparisons were analyzed by the two-tailed t test for independent samples. Multiple comparisons were evaluated by ANOVA and Tukey’s tests, as appropriate. In agreement with the 7-NI results, NMDA did not increase CBF and ROS in nNOS-null mice (fig. The increases in CBF and ROS are mediated by cGMP and PKGBecause most biological effects of NO are mediated by activation of sGC and cGMP (Hofmann et al , 2006), we investigated whether this signaling mechanism is responsible for the increase in CBF and ROS induced by NMDA. NOX2 is localized to endomembranes in neocortical somata and dendrites that express NMDA receptors and nNOSNext, we sought to provide ultrastructural evidence supporting the involvement of NADPH oxidase and nNOS in NMDA receptor-dependent ROS production. We sought to determine whether NADPH oxidase is the source of the ROS produced by NMDA receptor activation, and whether ROS contribute to the NMDA-induced increase in CBF. The increase in ROS was attenuated by MK801 (5μM) or L-NNA (100μM), attesting to its dependence on NMDA receptors and NOS activity (fig. We sought to determine whether ROS participate in the increase in CBF induced by NMDA receptor activation, and to identify the source and signaling mechanisms responsible for the ROS production. Recent data in NOX2-null mice have implicated NADPH oxidase-derived ROS (Kishida et al , 2006), but functional evidence linking NMDA receptor activity to NOX2-dependent ROS production was lacking. Our findings fill several knowledge gaps in the mechanisms by which NMDA receptors trigger ROS production. Arterial blood pressure and blood gases were carefully monitored and maintained in the physiological range. The pro-oxidant effects of NO and cGMP have also been described in the heart (Xu et al , 2004). The specificity of the involvement of NO in NMDA-induced ROS production is demonstrated by our observation that the ROS increase produced by angiotensin II, which is also mediated by NOX2 (Kazama et al , 2004), is not affected by nNOS inhibition. For example, NADPH oxidase derived ROS are needed for the NMDA receptor-dependent activation of extracellular regulate kinase (ERK) in the hippocampus, a key signaling step in synaptic plasticity, and are involved in hippocampal long term potentiation (Kishida et al , 2005). Here, we provided in vivo and in vitro evidence that NMDA receptor activation induces ROS production via a NOX2 containing NADPH oxidase. NO, in turn, activates sGC increasing cGMP production, which leads to activation of PKG and increased NOX2 activity. Irrespective of the mechanisms of PKG activation, our findings identify NO-cGMP-PKG signaling as the critical link between NMDA receptors and NOX2-dependent ROS production.Concentrations of NMDA (100–300μM) higher than those used in the present study (40μM) can trigger ROS production from other sources, especially mitochondria, (Dugan et al , 1995b; Reynolds and Hastings, 1995; Bindokas et al , 1996). Therefore, additional ROS sources downstream of NADPH oxidase cannot be excluded, especially with NMDA receptor overactivation. Previous studies did not measure CBF and ROS simultaneously, and used concentrations of NMDA (100, 300 lM) that cause spreading depression (Arrick et al , 2007), a phenomenon well known to confound the hemodynamic effects of NMDA (Zhang et al , 1995; Ayata and Moskowitz, 2006). Although the mechanisms by which PKG activates NADPH oxidase have not been elucidated, increasing evidence points to PKG-dependent activation of the small GTPase Rac1, an essential step in NADPH oxidase activation. Monitoring of CBFAs previously described (Girouard et al , 2007; Park et al , 2008), mice were anesthetized with isoflurane and the femoral artery was cannulated for recording of arterial pressure and blood sampling. DHE (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR; 2 μmol/L) was superfused on the somatosensory cortex for 60 minutes, as previously described (Girouard et al , 2006, 2007). The sections were collected on slides at 100 μm intervals throughout the region exposed by the cranial window (Girouard et al , 2006, 2007). The latter possibility is suggested by the finding that NMDA increases ROS production in cerebral arterioles (Girouard et al , 2006). We also used a peptide that disrupts the association between the NMDA receptor complex and nNOS through the scaffolding protein PSD95 (Sattler et al , 1999; Park et al , 2008). NADPH oxidase activityNADPH-dependent superoxide production was measured in cell-membrane fractions by an enhanced luminol-based assay as described previously (Anrather et al , 2006). After resuspension in lysis buffer (10 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.1, 300mM sucrose, 1mM MgCl2, 1 mM EGTA, 1mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 5 M leupeptin, 1 M pepstatin A, and 10 g/ml aprotinin), cells were disrupted on ice by sonication and centrifuged (10,000g for 10 min at 4 °C). Parallel reactions included 100 units of superoxide dismutase and results are reported as superoxide dismutase inhibitable light emission (RLU). Parallel reactions included 100 units of superoxide dismutase and results are reported as superoxide dismutase inhibitable light emission (RLU). and their brain tissue fixed by vascular perfusion with 3.75% acrolein and 2% paraformaldehyde in phosphate buffer (PB)(Milner and Drake, 2001). The acrolein-fixed brains were removed, and sectioned coronally (40 μm thickness) through the region of the somatosensory cortex (0.4–0.5 mm rostral to bregma)(Kazama et al , 2004) using a Vibratome. For NOX2 immunoreactivity, sections were incubated sequentially in: (a) anti-goat immunoglobulin (IgG) conjugated to biotin (Vector, Burlingame, CA) diluted 1/400 in TS containing 0.1% BSA, (b) peroxidase-avidin complex (Vectastain Elite kit) in TS, and (c) 3,3′-diaminobenzidine (Aldrich Chemical, Milwaukee, WI) and hydrogen peroxide in TS. Sections were rinsed in PBS, post-fixed for 10 min in 2% glutaraldehyde and rinsed again. 