While this allowed us to identify themes applicable to all family caregivers, follow-up open-ended questions that assessed how the parental role and presence of children impacted their prognostic communication needs would have been ideal and will be incorporated in future assessments. In addition, due to the open-access nature of our website and survey, we could not confirm whether respondents met eligibility criteria. However, given the emotionally sensitive nature of our survey, it is unlikely that respondents would falsely identify themselves as bereaved fathers due to cancer. A related limitation concerns the representativeness of our sample. While we sought to characterize the experiences of a unique population, these fathers’ experiences of prognostic communication are relevant to a broader range of families affected by cancer or other illnesses. Other studies have demonstrated caregivers’ desire for increased involvement in treatment and care decisions [9] as well as more specificity about their loved ones’ illness process and prognosis [10]. al, have suggested separate meetings with the patient and caregiver given their differential information requirements at the end of life [21]. Peer support in groups such as ours may help bereaved caregivers address unresolved distress regarding prognostic communication and the often unexpected nature of death. In summary, addressing emotional and informational needs of family members is a critical aspect of high quality end-of-life care [8]. Despite the central role that spouses play in caring for patients with terminal cancer, few studies have specifically examined caregivers’ experiences of prognostic communication at the end of their partner's life. What do you wish had been different, if anything?”The website was advertised among colleagues at several large cancer institutions and through the media, including NBC's Today Show [11], the Associated Press [12], and the New York Times Health section [13]. Data from the online survey were collected between October 2012 and November 2013. Data analysisElectronic responses were uploaded into a qualitative analysis software program (NVivo 10, QSR international). Data analysisElectronic responses were uploaded into a qualitative analysis software program (NVivo 10, QSR international). Coders independently assigned inductive descriptive codes to themes identified in the text, using the respondents’ own language when possible. They described the journey of their wives’ advanced cancer as overwhelming, uncharted territory.“...maybe it was our naiveté but we sometimes felt like we were kindergartners tossed into high school, and everyone expected us to know what was going to happen...we didn't know, and trying to figure what questions to ask was really tough, and not to mention a little disheartening.”Death as a surprise was an important subtheme to both the need for more information about end of life and wish for honest and clear communication. I was expecting one more scan result that would prove to both of us that we have tried everything medically possible, thus providing the freedom to pull back from curative treatment. Specifically, 12% cited the importance of physician compassion when delivering bad news.“They never sugarcoated details but at the same time were very caring and sympathetic to my feelings/emotions.” Several studies have demonstrated that younger age – for both patient and caregiver – is associated with an increased desire to know more information about illness and prognosis [19, 20]. Previous research also suggests that patients and their caregivers have differential informational needs about prognosis at the end of life, with caregivers seeking more information and patients seeking less [18, 21]. We suspect the importance of prognostic communication may be especially important for dying parents with dependent-age children at home. We suspect the importance of prognostic communication may be especially important for dying parents with dependent-age children at home. 