Advances in imaging modalities have improved our ability to diagnose anomalous aortic origin of the coronary arteries and describe differences in anatomic features that may or may not be associated with increased risk of ischemia in this population. Study LimitationsAs discussed above, there is no gold standard test which correlates with higher risk of death and presumably with induced ischemia in AAORCA, and hence, validating TPScR as a risk stratification tool is challenging without longer term follow-up data. This study confirms previous reports that exercise-induced regional WMA are uncommon in these patients; however, it suggests TPScR may be an indicator of higher risk for ischemia. Echocardiographic images were obtained using GE Vivid E95 ultrasound machines (GE Health Medical). Echocardiographic B-mode images were obtained from the apical four-chamber, two-chamber, and long-axis views, and parasternal long- and short-axes views at baseline and immediately after termination of exercise. Regional wall motion was assessed by visual inspection by a single attending pediatric cardiologist with experience in reading ESEs (W.R.T.). Analyses were performed using R Statistical Software (Foundation for Statistical Computing) and Stata software (StataCorp). Of the 14 unoperated AAORCA patients that had CTA, all had a separate ostium of the RCA within the left coronary sinus, with most having slit-like orifice (12/14) and right dominant coronary artery systems (13/14; Table 2). Exercise stress echocardiography in adults with CAD has a sensitivity and specificity of 80% to 88% and 83% to 86%, respectively, to detect coronary luminal stenosis of at least 50%, which is considered the minimum degree of stenosis necessary to cause exercise-induced regional WMA observable by visual inspection.11 The gold standard test for determining the degree of coronary stenosis is angiography. Because of this lack of a gold standard surrogate endpoint, sensitivity, specificity and predictive value of stress imaging in this condition are unknown, and therefore, the results are necessarily difficult to interpret and use to guide decision making, whether positive or negative. Indeed, well-documented observation of exercise-inducible WMA in AAORCA has not been widely reported even for symptomatic patients.14 It is unclear whether this indicates that stress imaging to detect WMA has not been fully examined in this patient population, lacks sensitivity to discriminate higher from lower risk anatomic configurations, or is possibly not appropriate for risk stratification given the low incidence of sudden death and thus presumably low pretest probability of stress-inducible ischemia sufficient to cause WMA. al., nine patients with anomalous coronary artery origins (seven AAOLCA and two AAORCA) underwent postoperative ESE, with none showing stress-induced WMA.15 Similarly, Osaki et. reported dobutamine stress echocardiography results on 17 patients with unoperated anomalous coronary artery origins (13 AAOLCA and 18 AAORCA) and no stress-induced WMA were observed.16 al., TPScR was shown to be sensitive and specific for detecting regional myocardial ischemia in adults with significant CAD (> 50% luminal diameter stenosis as measured by coronary angiography).10 Specifically, TPScR ≥ 1.1 in the LV inferior wall was 100% sensitive, 92% specific and 93% accurate in detecting significant CAD of the RCA.10 In the present study, a TPScR >1.1 in the LV inferior wall was found in 24% of unoperated patients with AAORCA but not in any controls. reported 53 AAOCA patients with symptoms at presentation, 36% of which continued to have symptoms following surgical repair.17 Of note, this population included both AAORCA and AAOLCA patients. Anatomic features such as a high (distal) origin, interarterial and intramural course, a slit-like orifice and an acute angle of takeoff may be associated with increased risk of ischemia in patients with anomalous aortic origin of the coronary.18 However, to our knowledge, no direct correlation between any specific anatomic feature and increased risk of cardiac events has been conclusively shown. 