For the social novelty test, Stranger 2 was introduced into the previously empty chamber, and the test mouse was allowed to explore all three chambers for 10 min. Mice were habituated 5 min a day for 3 consecutive days in a box (29 × 29 × 25 cm). One hour later, one of the two identical objects was replaced by a novel object (object C), and the test mouse was permitted to explore the box for 5 min. Mice were individually housed and restricted for food until their body weight was reduced to approximately 85% of the original body weight. However, the roles of ADAMTS18 on CNS development and functions remain unclear. MWM consists of a circular pool that is filled half-way with water. Sandwich ELISA and Western blottingFor Sandwich ELISA, brain tissues were dissected from mice, weighted, and homogenized in 0.1 M PBS buffer (pH 7.4) containing protease inhibitor cocktail at 1 g/10 mL at 4 °C. For Western blot, brain tissues were dissected from mice, weighted, and homogenized in RIPA buffer [50 mM Tris (pH7.4), 150 mM Nacl, 1% Triton X-100, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS] (Boster Wuhan, China), with protease inhibitors and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay reagent (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay reagent (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). Kolmogorov–Smirnov’s test was used for the Sholl analysis of dendritic complexity. For RAM test, error% was analyzed using repeated measures of ANOVA to determine genotype effects on behavioral responses. Sholl analysis of reconstructed dendrites (Fig. The role of the laminin-mediated phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-kinase)/Akt/glycogen synthasekinase-3β (GSK-3β)/collapsin response mediator protein-2 (PI3K/AKT/GSK-3β/CRMP2) signaling pathway in the regulation of neuron polarization was then investigated (Inagaki et al , 2001; Yoshimura et al , 2005). ADAMTS-1, 4, 5, and 9) have been reported to be involved in neurite outgrowth and synaptic plasticity (Lemarchant et al , 2013; Gottschall and Howell, 2015), the possibility that Adamts18 deletion affects the expression of other ADAMTS family members was determined. These data suggest that Adamts18 deletion could affect the expression of other Adamts genes; this may be a compensatory effect for Adamts18 deletion. Many studies have shown that the increase in activated CRMP2 induces multiple neurite formations (Inagaki et al , 2001; Yoshimura et al , 2005). It has been shown that Lama5 mRNA is highly abundant in the hippocampal DG (Omar et al , 2017) and is largely overlapped with Adamts18. ADAMTS3 is expressed in the excitatory neurons of the embryonic and postnatal cerebral cortex and hippocampus. Ogino et al  (2017) reported that ADAMTS3 inactivates Reelin in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus by cleaving it at Reelin repeat 3 (N-t site). ADAMTS4 (Hisanaga et al , 2012) and ADAMTS5 (Krstic et al , 2012) also mediate N-t cleavage, but whether they cleave Reelin in vivo has not been investigated. ADAMTS1 expression is closely associated with an increase in the ADAMTS-specific N-terminal cleavage fragment of brevican (Yuan et al , 2002). All behavioral tests were blinded to the genotype of mice and performed during the light phase between 09:00 and 17:00. It is a major defining factor of how input information is integrated and how synaptic plasticity is maintained (Hausser et al , 2000; Jan and Jan, 2010). It is a major defining factor of how input information is integrated and how synaptic plasticity is maintained (Hausser et al , 2000; Jan and Jan, 2010). Changes in dendritic structure have been observed in multiple psychiatric disorders, including depression (Qiao et al , 2016). ADAMTS18 was previously linked to white matter integrity in healthy 72- to 74-year-old people by a genome-wide association study (Lopez et al , 2012). The sections were immersed in Nissl staining solution (Beyotime Biotechnology, China) for 5 min, rinsed in distilled water twice for several seconds, and cleared in xylene twice for 10 min. After washing with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), sections were blocked with 3% BSA–PBS for 1 h and then incubated with an appropriate antibody such as anti-microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2) and antilaminin overnight at 4 °C, followed by goat anti-rabbit IgG fluorescent secondary antibody (1:200) (Jackson Immuno Research, Cat. The functions of ADAMTSs in the central nervous system (CNS) remain unclear. Images were processed by being converted to gray scale after background subtraction in Image-Pro Plus 6.0 (IPP, MediaCybernetics, Inc., SilverSpring, MD, USA) software. Then mean fluorescence intensity was gained by dividing the sum area by the sum IOD. Analysis of dendritic morphologyTo analyze dendritic morphologies of hippocampal dentate gyrus (DG) granule cells, measurements of total dendritic length and Sholl analysis of granule cells were performed using ImageJ 1.52d (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA; http://imagej.nih.gov/ij). Dendritic complexity was assessed by Sholl analysis (a plugin of ImageJ) on reconstructed neurons. Specific segments of spines on DG granule cells were reconstructed the same way as the analysis of dendritic morphology. The number of spines on a limited length of a dendrite was counted using the ImageJ software. In humans, ADAMTS18 mutations have been linked to tumorigenesis (Jin et al , 2007), developmental eye disorders (Aldahmesh et al , 2011, 2013; Peluso et al , 2013), and reduced bone mineral density (BMD) (Xiong et al , 2009). The apparatus has a circular platform (diameter 46 cm), which is elevated 46 cm above the floor. The test mouse was placed on one of the open sectors and allowed to freely explore for 5 min. The test mouse was placed in the dark partition and allowed to freely explore the two partitions for 15 min. The time that the mouse spent in the light partition was recorded by the software Truscan 2.01. The apparatus consists of a transparent acrylic box (60 × 40 cm) that is divided equally into three chambers (20 × 40 cm each). 