To assess the neural correlates of motor and non-motor symptoms in PD, numerous functional neuroimaging studies localized and quantified abnormalities within and between different brain regions (cf. The convergence cluster in the left IPL was mainly (78%) driven by “PD-OFF > Controls” contrasts with additional contribution (22%) from “PD-ON > Controls” contrasts and eight experiments from six studies (Choe et al , 2013; Gorges et al , 2015; Hu et al , 2015; Wen et al , 2013; Yang et al , 2013; Zhang et al , 2015), while two of them focused on non-motor symptoms of PD (Gorges et al , 2015; Wen et al , 2013). Of the cluster’s volume 72.3% was located in area PF, 22.2% in area PFcm, and 3.3% in area PFt (Caspers et al , 2008; Caspers et al , 2006). Of the cluster’s volume 72.3% was located in area PF, 22.2% in area PFcm, and 3.3% in area PFt (Caspers et al , 2008; Caspers et al , 2006). Of the cluster’s volume 72.3% was located in area PF, 22.2% in area PFcm, and 3.3% in area PFt (Caspers et al , 2008; Caspers et al , 2006). Of the cluster’s volume 72.3% was located in area PF, 22.2% in area PFcm, and 3.3% in area PFt (Caspers et al , 2008; Caspers et al , 2006). Cluster maxima were located in areas PGa (39.3%) and PGp (31.5%). Cluster maxima were located in areas PGa (39.3%) and PGp (31.5%). While combing the ALFF and ReHo studies, the “PD > Controls” contrast showed the left IPL (local maximum: −40/ −68/42 in MNI space, 157 voxels), the right IPL (local maximum: 48/ −62/36 in MNI space 123 voxels), and the left middle temporal gyrus (local maximum: −58/ −24/ −11 in MNI space 104 voxels). The three studies using graph approach performed their analyses on a voxel-wise whole-brain approach and calculated strength, degree, betweenness centrality, clustering coefficient and local efficiency as the measurements of FC, functional integration and segregation. However, these task-based designs are strongly influenced by compliance and task performance of subjects, which might have confounded the results. However, these task-based designs are strongly influenced by compliance and task performance of subjects, which might have confounded the results. 3.3.Task-independent FC patternsHere, we identified patterns of task-independent (resting-state) FC patterns across the whole brain for each of the consistent seed regions determined in our ALE meta-analysis. In addition, the right IPL and the left IPL connected to contralateral IPL, bilateral middle and superior frontal gyri, mid-cingulate cortex, precuneus, middle and inferior temporal gyri, cerebellum, hippocampus, IFG, orbitofrontal cortex, and caudate nucleus (Fig. In detail, the posterior part of right IPL connected to the posterior part of left IPL, bilateral middle and superior frontal gyri, mid-cingulate cortex, precuneus, and orbitofrontal cortex. The left IPL connected to the right IPL, bilateral middle and superior frontal gyri, precental gyrus, posterior-medial frontal cortex, mid-cingulate cortex, precuneus, PCC, insula, hippocampus and orbitofrontal cortex. The left IPL connected to the right IPL, bilateral middle and superior frontal gyri, precental gyrus, posterior-medial frontal cortex, mid-cingulate cortex, precuneus, PCC, insula, hippocampus and orbitofrontal cortex. 3.5.Behavioral decodingIn order to assess the functional roles of our seed regions, which represent the consistent evidence for PD-related intrinsic aberrations, we performed behavioral decoding using the BrainMap database. We found significant associations (p < .05, corrected for multiple comparisons) of the posterior part of right IPL with perception (vision) and for the posterior part of left IPL with cognition, reasoning, explicit memory; the supramarginal gyrus showed significant association with perception (somesthesis), action and executive functions. Unlike task-based fMRI it is relatively uninfluenced by compliance or task performance and thus has become increasingly popular to investigate clinical populations including PD. Interestingly, the strength of this shift increased with age in the mutation carriers but not in the noncarriers, pointing to a further progression of the compensatory mechanism (Helmich et al , 2015). These findings imply, that after an initial break down of efficient processing in the basal ganglia due to a lack of dopamine, the deficit is countered by increased connectivity in other brain regions. In manifest PD, the compensatory mechanism will work best where dopamine levels are still high until the system is worn out and will start to break down in later disease stages (Helmich et al , 2010).In addition, a study in parkinsonian primates has shown that dopamine depletion may lead to an increasing functional overlap and cross-talk of previously segregated cortico-striatal loops (Bergman et al , 1998). A recent ALE meta-analysis examining the functions of the inferior parietal lobe identified four functionally dissociable clusters within this region (Bzdok, Reid, Laird, Fox, Eickhof, 2016). Whereas the overall connectivity throughout the brain increases, connectivity within or between regions, implicated in a certain task (e.g., during a working memory challenge), may decrease. A recent neuroimaging meta-analysis based on 10 ReHo studies in PD (in the OFF-state) found a convergent increased ReHo in the DMN, mainly in bilateral IPL and mPFC. In particular, the posterior part of IPL was connected mainly with the DMN subregions. In particular, the posterior part of IPL was connected mainly with the DMN subregions. Seed-based methods measure FC between the averaged BOLD time course of a region of interest (ROI) (or a seed) and the time course of other brain voxels; ICA is a data-driven approach that identifies intrinsic neural networks; ALFF, as a regional approach, assesses the regional intensity of oscillatory fluctuations in the BOLD signal; ReHo is also a regional method, which calculates the similarity between the BOLD signal of particular voxels and the nearest voxels within a given cluster. Multiple comparisons correction of neuroimaging findings is a critical step to ensure statistical rigor of such studies. Thus, in order to characterize resting state abnormalities in PD as comprehensively as possible we included findings from all approaches. Thus, in order to characterize resting state abnormalities in PD as comprehensively as possible we included findings from all approaches. Thus, in order to characterize resting state abnormalities in PD as comprehensively as possible we included findings from all approaches. Taken together, this diversity has strongly contributed to provide an ambiguous picture of pathophysiological mechanisms underlying PD. Our search strings were: (Parkinson’s disease OR Parkinson disease) AND (resting state fMRI OR FC in resting state functional magnetic resonance), which resulted in 107 studies. Our search strings were: (Parkinson’s disease OR Parkinson disease) AND (resting state fMRI OR FC in resting state functional magnetic resonance), which resulted in 107 studies. Our search strings were: (Parkinson’s disease OR Parkinson disease) AND (resting state fMRI OR FC in resting state functional magnetic resonance), which resulted in 107 studies. Recorded data includes the first author’s name, year of publication, age, gender, number of subjects, the analysis approach (ALFF, ICA, ReHo, graph-theory), and the peak coordinates (x,y,z) in Talairach (Talairach & Tournoux, 1988) or Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) (Evans et al , 1993) stereotactic space. Recorded data includes the first author’s name, year of publication, age, gender, number of subjects, the analysis approach (ALFF, ICA, ReHo, graph-theory), and the peak coordinates (x,y,z) in Talairach (Talairach & Tournoux, 1988) or Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) (Evans et al , 1993) stereotactic space. In the first step, the ALE algorithm models the reported foci as center peaks of 3D Gaussian probability distributions, which reflect the spatial uncertainty associated with each focus. In the second step, the probability distributions of all activation foci in a particular experiment are combined for each voxel, which creates a modeled activation (MA) map for that particular experiment (Turkeltaub et al , 2012). 2.4.Task-based FC: meta-analytic connectivity modelingUsing the regions identified in the above ALE meta-analysis as seeds, we then performed meta-analytic co-activation modeling (MACM) in order to delineate brain areas, which are significantly co-activated with these. We used the BrainMap database that includes coordinates of reported activation foci as well as the associated meta-data of more than 10,000 neuroimaging experiments (Laird et al , 2011; Laird, Eickhoff, Kurth, et al , 2009; Turner & Laird, 2012). Subsequently, we conducted quantitative meta-analysis to test for convergence across the foci reported in the experiments. 2.6.Behavioral decodingIn order to assess the behavioral roles of the seed regions determined in our ALE meta-analysis, we performed behavioral decoding using the BrainMap database. In detail, the behavioral profile was identified by detecting the taxonomic labels for which the probability of finding activation in the seed regions identified in the main ALE analysis was significantly higher than by chance across the whole BrainMap database (Laird, Eickhoff, Kurth, et al , 2009; Laird, Eickhoff, Li, et al , 2009; Rottschy, Caspers, et al , 2013). In detail, the behavioral profile was identified by detecting the taxonomic labels for which the probability of finding activation in the seed regions identified in the main ALE analysis was significantly higher than by chance across the whole BrainMap database (Laird, Eickhoff, Kurth, et al , 2009; Laird, Eickhoff, Li, et al , 2009; Rottschy, Caspers, et al , 2013). The cluster of convergence in the right IPL was mainly (64.5%) driven by “PD-OFF > Controls” experiments with additional 32.5% from “PD-ON < Controls” contrasts. The cluster of convergence in the right IPL was mainly (64.5%) driven by “PD-OFF > Controls” experiments with additional 32.5% from “PD-ON < Controls” contrasts. Importantly, there was a substantial contribution from different methodologies, as ALFF studies contributed 18%, ReHo 46.5% and ICA 35.5%. The cluster of convergence in the right IPL was mainly driven by contribution from “PD-OFF > Controls” (98%) and six experiments from three studies (Gorges et al , 2015; Wen et al , 2013; Zhang et al , 2015), while two of them focused on non-motor symptoms of PD (Gorges et al , 2015; Wen et al , 2013); (ii) the posterior part of left IPL. 