Approximately 13 % of youth in California were likely to experience frequent relational and physical victimization during the 12 months before taking the survey and 6.5 % were likely to frequently use multiple substances in the 30 days prior to taking the survey. Previous research has found that there are large individual and societal costs to youth who use drugs including increased likelihood for substance abuse and the associated costs of treatment, poor academic outcomes, mental health problems, and delinquency (Bui et al  2000; Dewey 1999; Newcomb et al  1997). These included those who were not victimized, those who experienced a few types of victimization, and those who were likely to experience all seven different types of victimization. The prior study assessed items similar to those considered in the present study (being hit, having property taken, being called bad names, etc. Similar to victimization, it is well established within the substance use empirical literatures that the types of substances, how frequently those substances are used, and the multiple use of substances are also important risk factors to youths’ social and emotional outcomes (Connell et al  2009; Gilreath et al  2012). The odds of substance use among those who were classified as experiencing occasional verbal and physical victimization ranged from 1.65 to 2.38. Currently, few school-based interventions address both substance use and school safety and none cater the interventions to different groups based on their levels of victimization and usage (Cornell and Mayer 2010; Mayer and Furlong 2010). The instrument is limited in asking questions about frequency and recency of other drugs (including illicit and prescription medications). Social development models and social control theory postulates that the likelihood of delinquency is associated with persons who have weak bonds to conventional social institutions (Catalano and Hawkins 1996; Gasper et al  2010; Hirschi 1969). Finally, it is possible that substance use proceeds victimization (Tharp-Taylor et al  2009) or that involvement in substance use creates an environment where youth are victimized more (White et al  1999). SampleThe data used in this study is from the ongoing large-scale California Healthy Kids Survey (CHKS), conducted by WestEd on behalf of the California Department of Education. Items related to substance use and victimization were adapted from the CDC Youth Risk Behavior Survey and the California Student Substance Use Survey. Victimization has been found to be associated with suicidality, poor academic outcomes, truancy, and depression (Gastic 2008; Glew et al  2008; Klomek et al  2007). As described in the “Introduction”, school victimization can entail verbal/relational aggression as well as physical victimization (Benbenishty and Astor 2005; Borum et al  2010; Swearer et al  2010), and these types of victimization can occur singularly or concurrently. Each question had response values of none, one time, two to three times, and four or more times. AnalysisLatent class analysis (LCA) was conducted using Mplus 6.1 (Lubke and Muthén 2005; McCutcheon 1987). FIML is implemented simultaneously in the analysis using all available data to provide optimal model parameter estimates given the data at hand. A majority of the sample reported Hispanic ethnicity (54.7 %). A majority of the sample reported Hispanic ethnicity (54.7 %). The majority of students were in 7th (~37 %) and 9th (34.1 %) grade. Results of successive LCA models are presented in Table 2. Four-class models (in italics) provided the best overall fit to the data for substance use behavior and school victimization. Students experiencing occasional verbal and physical victimization accounted for 22.3 % of the sample. Students experiencing occasional verbal and physical victimization accounted for 22.3 % of the sample. Students experiencing occasional verbal and physical victimization accounted for 22.3 % of the sample. Finally, a group of students reporting frequent verbal and physical victimization accounted for 12.5 % of the sample. Finally, a group of students reporting frequent verbal and physical victimization accounted for 12.5 % of the sample. Finally, a group of students reporting frequent verbal and physical victimization accounted for 12.5 % of the sample. Respondents in this class were highly likely to be physically and verbally victimized four or more times in the past year. The frequent poly-substance users comprised 6.5 % of the sample and had at least a 40 % chance of indicating that they used tobacco, alcohol, and marijuana on three or more days in the past 30. 