4 is the familiar standard deviation of the frequency of cases against time, while b1 and b2 in Eq. 4 is the familiar standard deviation of the frequency of cases against time, while b1 and b2 in Eq. 4 is the familiar standard deviation of the frequency of cases against time, while b1 and b2 in Eq. Further details are given in Cliff et al  (1986, pp. Further details are given in Cliff et al  (1986, pp. Further details are given in Cliff et al  (1986, pp. Abramson et al  2003; Grenfell et al  2001; Zhao and Wang 2004). Abramson et al  2003; Grenfell et al  2001; Zhao and Wang 2004). 3.4 Swash and backwash stagesThe means of the two edges, The positions of the two means are shown on this graph. This can be operationally defined as the period between the midway position, λt, the leading and following edges and the end of the outbreak (t = T + 0.5). 3.5 Spatial versions of the basic reproduction number, R0The basic reproduction number2, R0, is one of the most useful parameters used to characterize mathematically infectious disease processes. 3.5 Spatial versions of the basic reproduction number, R0The basic reproduction number2, R0, is one of the most useful parameters used to characterize mathematically infectious disease processes. 3.5 Spatial versions of the basic reproduction number, R0The basic reproduction number2, R0, is one of the most useful parameters used to characterize mathematically infectious disease processes. This raises the prospect of defining a spatial version of R0. Values over unity imply a tendency to spread and calibrate the velocity of such spread (the larger the value, the greater the rate of spread). But how far do the methods work when applied to actual epidemic waves of infectious diseases? To conduct a more realistic test we follow in the classic footsteps of Bailey (1953) in using outbreaks of the highly contagious human virus disease, measles, for our epidemic modelling. 4.1 Results for a single epidemic wave (Wave III)The first of the Icelandic measles waves to be analyzed was triggered by the arrival in Reykjavík harbour in April 1916 of a ship from Norway with a sailor still infectious with measles. Differences between the two series plotted in (c) are illustrated in Fig. 3d and e. The mean values for the two series are used to define the swash and backwash stages of Wave III in Fig. Finally, cumulative curves for the number of newly infected and newly terminated districts used to define susceptible, infective and recovered districts appear in Fig. Finally, cumulative curves for the number of newly infected and newly terminated districts used to define susceptible, infective and recovered districts appear in Fig. Finally, cumulative curves for the number of newly infected and newly terminated districts used to define susceptible, infective and recovered districts appear in Fig. Finally, cumulative curves for the number of newly infected and newly terminated districts used to define susceptible, infective and recovered districts appear in Fig. 4.2 Results for a train of epidemic events (Waves III–XVI)How far are the results for the first wave (Wave III) representative of the whole 60-year sequence of waves? 8 presents the cumulative curves for 14 separate measles epidemic waves in Iceland over the 60-year period for both newly-infected districts and newly-terminated districts. 8a) are steeper than those for newly terminated districts (Fig. 9 which shows the superimposed cumulative curves from the previous figure to define susceptible, infective and recovered zones when plotted on a phase diagram. Table 3 confirms that the leading edge is very significantly faster whether measured in months (nearly three months faster) or when standardized by the overall duration of the epidemic wave (14% faster). Table 3 confirms that the leading edge is very significantly faster whether measured in months (nearly three months faster) or when standardized by the overall duration of the epidemic wave (14% faster). The third measure, the standard deviation, showed little difference possibly reflecting the influence of a few extreme observations. A fast epidemic wave will display a right-skewed distribution with the majority of cases occurring in the early phases of the epidemic and positive b1 values. Overall, the four standard measures of epidemic velocity suggest that the Icelandic waves we have studied show a distinct tendency to have relatively faster leading edges and relatively slower following edges. This spread process is set into reverse as populations recover and previously-infected areas are cleared. The duration of the stages averages around 8 months for swash and 11 months for backwash. A summary of the mechanisms involved and examples of such spread are given elsewhere (Haggett 2000; Cliff et al  2000). Is there any evidence from the analysis that the epidemic waves are changing systematically over time or may they be regarded as samples drawn from a relatively stable wave population? In the exemplar case, the threshold of the model was set to one (qij = 1). The swash–backwash model may be readily adjusted to include such non-discrete examples by resetting the threshold so that either (a) qij > 1 or (b) a particular threshold rate (cases/susceptible population) is exceeded. Extensions of the single wave model to Icelandic epidemics which are recurrent and continuous rather than recurrent but discrete is one obvious pathway. Making comparisons across different spatial scales and between countries (each of which has its own recording infrastructure) is a classic geographical problem which has long attracted statistical research (Duncan et al  1961). As such it provides a useful approach to diseases which follow this simple structure (classically, measles). As such it provides a useful approach to diseases which follow this simple structure (classically, measles). Here, we have concentrated on the changing spatial distribution of the wave, and we have presented a simple method for identifying the leading and trailing edges of the spatial advance and retreat of such waves. into a new area with a susceptible population which is open to infection. In this first section we modify standard statistical methods to provide some elementary measures of spatial form and then illustrate their application through a small hypothetical example. 3.1 Analysis of a hypothetical waveWe begin with the observation that a single epidemic wave in any large geographical area is a composite of the waves for each of its constituent sub-areas. 9–19) provides a useful historical review of these early papers. 3a, the 12×10 matrix is re-arranged so as to position the start cells in an ascending temporal order. 3b, so as to arrange the end cells in ascending temporal order. Bailey 1975) but with the essential difference that our population is made up of areas (SA, IA and RA) rather than individuals. The epidemiological significance of the integral values is discussed later in this paper. Higher moments about the mean can also be computed to yield valuable measures of epidemiological behaviour. 