Bax is the prototypic pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 family member and plays a major role in regulating cell death in variety of cell types including the neuron (Krajewski, et al , 1994, Oltvai, et al , 1993). A difference was noted in the pattern of activated caspase-3 staining in traumatized TBI CA3 neurons: Caspase-3 immunoreactivity was present in both the cytosol and nucleus in WT CA3 neurons, but caspase-3 immunoreactivity was restricted to the cytosol of neurons in Bax null mice in CA3 neurons. Bax Deficiency Protects Neurons from Apoptotic Cell Death Following TBITUNEL-positive cells displaying apoptotic morphology were present in the CA1, CA3 and dentate regions of hippocampus in brains from WT and Bax null mice 24 h after TBI (Fig 2A). Sham operated Bax-null mice had significantly larger brains than sham-operated WT mice (Fig 3B, left) suggesting that Bax deletion may produce significant developmental changes in brain resulting in megaencephalopathy. Neurological Assessment of WT and Bax null Mice Following TBIMotor function (round beam balance and wire grip test) was studied in WT and Bax null mice on days 1–5 after TBI. Visible platform latencies on days 19–20 followed a similar pattern. Swim speeds were equal between groups indicating that there was no motor impairment in the spatial memory testing (data not shown). This increased permeability leads to the release of proteins that normally reside between the inner and outer mitochondrial membranes including cytochrome C, AIF and other pro-apoptotic proteins into the cytoplasm (for review, see Danial and Korsmeyer, 2004). Similar findings have also been reported in studies of CNS and tissue samples from human trauma victims. There was an increase in caspase-3 activity within the hippocampus in the WT mice after trauma compared to sham-operated controls. There was an increase in caspase-3 activity within the hippocampus in the WT mice after trauma compared to sham-operated controls. We found no significant difference in total caspase-3 activity in WT and Bax null mice as result of trauma; however, there was a difference in the subcellular distribution of activated caspase-3. One such mechanism is binding of the Fas ligand to its receptor which results in activation of caspase-8, and cleavage and translocation of the pro-apoptotic protein Bid to the mitochondria. Expression of Fas ligand and activation of Fas-mediated apoptosis has been reported in both traumatic and ischemic CNS injury (Martin-Villalba, et al , 1999, Raoul, et al , 1999, Rosenbaum, et al , 2000). The unexpected finding of this study is the severe behavioral impairment of both sham-operated and injured Bax-null mice. The results from our behavioral tests suggest that Bax may be very important in normal developmental cell death and its disruption may result in cognitive impairment. The results from our behavioral tests suggest that Bax may be very important in normal developmental cell death and its disruption may result in cognitive impairment. The results from our behavioral tests suggest that Bax may be very important in normal developmental cell death and its disruption may result in cognitive impairment. Although this work suggests that Bax expression after TBI results in a decreased number of surviving neurons and thus worsens long-term outcome. A 5 mm craniotomy was performed over the left parieto-temporal cortex, the bone flap removed, and brain temperature maintained at 37 +/− 0.5 °C for 5 min. Mice were then subjected to vertically directed controlled cortical impact using a pneumatic cylinder with a 3 mm tip impounder at a velocity 6.0 +/− 0.2 m/sec and a depth of 1.2 mm. Protein content was assayed using Bio-Rad protein assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA). Furthermore, cell death with necrotic morphology may be mediated by activation of apoptotic pathways as Fas or TNFα under certain conditions (Degterev, et al , 2005). FITC-conjugated digoxygenin antibodies were added, incubated at room temperature for 30 min and counterstained with DAPI. TUNEL positive cells with TUNEL staining restricted to the nuclei as confirmed by DAPI double staining were considered apoptotic (TUNEL positive); diffusely TUNEL-stained cells with no apoptotic morphology were excluded (Portera-Cailliau, et al , 1995). Lesion volume was then quantified as (contralateral volume − ipsilateral volume)/contralateral volume and is expressed as percent contralateral. Total brain volume was calculated by adding the ipsilateral and contralateral hemispheric volumes together and is expressed as mm3. The sections (prepared as described above) to be counted were obtained by choosing the slide having those sections with the largest contusion area (n=10–12/group). The sections (prepared as described above) to be counted were obtained by choosing the slide having those sections with the largest contusion area (n=10–12/group). The number of surviving hippocampal neurons in CA1 and CA3 regions were counted in the ipsi- and contralateral hemispheres using methods previously described (Tehranian, et al , 2006). Assessment of Motor Function and Morris Water Maze PerformanceAnalysis of motor function and Morris Water Maze spatial memory acquisition was performed as previously described (Sinz, et al , 1999, Whalen, et al , 1999). Wild type and Bax null mice underwent sham or TBI surgery (n= 15 per group). Performance in the Morris Water maze was quantified by measuring latency in finding the platform. Animals whose D20 visible platform scores were greater than 2 SD from the sham group 2-day average were removed from the study. Animals whose D20 visible platform scores were greater than 2 SD from the sham group 2-day average were removed from the study. Data from caspase-3 activity assay and TUNEL staining was analyzed by one-way ANOVA. Motor and Morris Water Maze data were analyzed by repeated-measures analysis of variance (RMANOVA). 