It also extends the use of quantitative measures of work-related moral stress, previously limited to health care workers, to the experiences of research staff members. However, consistent with our focus-group findings and previous qualitative studies (Alexander and Richman 2008; Richman, et al  2012; True et al  2011), approximately 40% endorsed items indicating their organization did not provide counseling for job-related stress and had unrealistic demands for recruitment numbers and multiple staff role assignments. As predicted, a positive organizational climate was associated with a strong research commitment and with lower levels of moral stress, research mistrust, and moral practice dilemmas. Further testing may yield a higher alpha score.Finally, as with all anonymous, Web-based, self-report studies, this survey cannot confirm the status of respondents and is vulnerable to inaccurate response rates based on poor recall or response bias. Indeed, our scales were correlated with social desirability, and as a result of ceiling and floor effects, the scales may not have captured the full range of opinions. ConclusionMany of the ethical challenges faced by researchers can be understood in terms of the “scientist-citizen dilemma” (Fisher and Rosendahl 1990; Veatch 1987). These include a climate in which front-line researchers feel free to discuss whether job expectations (i.e., recruitment pressures, multiple role responsibilities) are realistic and fair and whether their safety and counseling needs are being adequately met, and are given the opportunity to reflect on the scientist-citizen dilemma and how moral practice dilemmas might be anticipated and resolved. They also grappled with stress associated with moral dilemmas, including difficulty protecting participant confidentiality, their inability to provide participants with needed counseling and services, frustration when screening protocols did not reflect real-world drug-use habits, participant attempts to over- or underreport their drug use, concern about consent comprehension, and the effort involved in defending their work against pervasive community research distrust. Subsequent research has demonstrated associations between moral distress and job burnout, emotional exhaustion, and job cynicism (Hamric and Blackhall 2007; Hamric et al  2012; Joseph and Deshpande 1997; Maslach 2003; Schluter et al  2008; Ulrich et al  2007; Webster and Baylis 2000). How to best meet these obligations when working with marginalized and vulnerable groups raises ethical challenges for which the broad language of federal regulations offers incomplete guidance (Fisher 1999; 2004). To achieve this, we constructed, psychometrically evaluated, and examined relationships among six scales for a Web-based survey designed to test the following hypotheses: Research staff members who evidence a strong commitment to their role in the research process and who perceive their organization as committed to research ethics and staff support will experience lower levels of moral stress.Research staff members who are distrustful of the research enterprise and who frequently grapple with moral practice dilemmas will have higher levels of moral stress. Detailed demographic and employment characteristics are provided in the Results section. Detailed demographic and employment characteristics are provided in the Results section. When designing participant protections, investigators typically draw on their own expertise and the advice of institutional review boards (IRBs) and community advisory boards (CABs). It ended with the 13-item Marlowe–Crowne Social Desirability Scale Short Form (Crowne and Marlowe 1960; Reynolds 1982), a seminal scale measuring the tendency of respondents to answer questions in a socially favorable manner, especially in work or other contexts with high social expectations. In this study, scale scores were applied to statistically control for the effects of social desirability bias in response to other measures. To assess response bias, Pearson product moment bivariate correlations between the social desirability scale and the six new scale scores were conducted. To test hypotheses 1 and 2 (see “Aims of the Current Study”) relationships among scales were then analyzed through two-tailed partial correlations controlling for social desirability. Demographic and Employment CharacteristicsDemographic and employment characteristics are provided in Table 2. The majority of participants were female, self-identified as non-Hispanic white, had received a bachelor’s or graduate degree, worked on 2–3 projects during the past 5 years, had at one time lived in the same community in which they conducted research, and reported a mean age of 35.10 years (standard deviation [SD] = 10.92, range = 20–65). Results are therefore reported using untransformed data.The results of the partial correlations supported hypotheses 1 and 2 (see Table 3). Research ethics climate (RECS), organizational research support (ORSS), and research commitment (RCI) were significantly and negatively correlated with moral stress (RMSS) and positively correlated with each other. Research mistrust (RMI) and research moral dilemmas (RMDS) were positively correlated with moral stress and with each other. Block 2 included the RECS, RCI, RMI, and RMDS (see Table 4). The role of the front-line researcher is critical to ensuring the responsible conduct of drug use research. The role of the front-line researcher is critical to ensuring the responsible conduct of drug use research. The role of the front-line researcher is critical to ensuring the responsible conduct of drug use research. Items with the lowest endorsement (57–62%) on the ORSS pertained to counseling for CRWs who experienced trauma on the job, realistic expectations regarding recruitment numbers, and assignment of CRWs to multiple roles. 