For this reason, innate immune system receptors are believed to recognise a far lower diversity of molecules than MHC molecules or immunoglobulins. When this was not the case, the end of the bait-like region was defined as the end of Block D (Lagueux et al  2000). The signal peptides were predicted using the program SignalP 3.0 (Bendtsen et al  2004). The glucanase homology domain was taken from Kim et al  (2000). It is therefore of interest to compare the molecular evolution of innate immune system molecules that bind directly to pathogens with the patterns observed in MHC and immunoglobulin molecules. Following the recommendation of McDonald (1998), we used the three different statistics (the Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistic, the number of runs, and the mean sliding G) for detecting heterogeneity, as each is most powerful in different situations. Following the recommendation of McDonald (1998), we used the three different statistics (the Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistic, the number of runs, and the mean sliding G) for detecting heterogeneity, as each is most powerful in different situations. These simulations were conditioned on the recombination rate R. In D. simulans and D. melanogaster there is no recombination in males, and therefore for autosomal genes R=2Nc (where N is the effective population size and c the crossing-over rate/bp/generation in females). These simulations were conditioned on the recombination rate R. In D. simulans and D. melanogaster there is no recombination in males, and therefore for autosomal genes R=2Nc (where N is the effective population size and c the crossing-over rate/bp/generation in females). We assumed that in D. simulans N = 2 × 106 and in D. melanogaster N = 106 (Andolfatto and Przeworski 2000). This analysis was based on published phylogenies of these species (((((melanogaster,simulans),(yakuba,erecta)),ananassae),pseudoobscura),(mojavensis,virilis)) (Ko et al  2003; Powell 1997). Previous studies on the molecular evolution of two families of Drosophila immune receptors have produced contrasting results. In the Anopheles gambiae aTepI gene, the C3d-like domain is very polymorphic (Blandin et al  2004). In both TepI and TepII, model M8A was the better fit to the data (Table 2). These ratios are significantly different in TepI (Table 3). Tep PolymorphismThe above analyses provide strong evidence that positive selection has acted on TepI. These estimates are similar to those reported for larger datasets from different populations by both Moriyama and Powell (1996) and Andolfatto (2001). However, we did look for variation within each of the genes, and in TepII the polymorphism-to-divergence ratio was significantly heterogeneous using both the D. simulans and the D. melanogaster datasets (D. melanogaster, mean G=15.4 [p<0.001], number of runs=183 [p=0.006], K-S=0.03 [p=0.03]; D. simulans, mean G=6.49 [p<0.03], number of runs=235 [p=0.22], K-S=0.04 [p=0.001]). The carbohydrate-recognition and glucanase-homology domains are candidate sites of host-parasite coevolution, as they have been found to bind directly to various parasite-associated polysaccharides in the GNBPs of other insects (Fabrick et al  2004). Summary statistics based on the frequency spectrum of polymorphisms are close to the neutral expectation, and none differed significantly from null distributions generated by coalescent simulations conditioned on θ (Table 5).The McDonald-Kreitman test also failed to give any evidence of positive selection acting on the GNBP genes (Table 6). Vertebrate immune system receptors such as MHC molecules and immunoglobulins are very specific in the parasite-derived epitopes that they bind to. However, TepI does not have a skewed frequency spectrum of polymorphisms or very low genetic diversity, as might be expected given that repeated selective sweeps have occurred in this gene. We found no evidence that TEPIV or TEPIII evolves under positive selection. The only significant deviation from the neutral model was a heterogeneous polymorphism:divergence ratio in GNBP2. Only about 0.2% of the divergence between D. simulans and D. melanogaster has occurred since the split of European and African populations (David and Capy 1988; Lachaise et al  1988). Therefore, it is possible that ancient balanced polymorphisms are a peculiarity of MHC evolution, rather than a general difference between innate and acquired immunity. This study combined with previous work means that the molecular evolution of four different classes of molecules that bind to the surface of pathogens and illicit an immune response have been studied. Unfortunately it is unknown whether insect TEPs are activated by parasite-derived proteases (as for α2-macroglobulin) or by host-derived proteases (as for complement proteins C3, C4, and C5). If the former is true, one hypothesis is that parasite proteases continually evolve new specificities that do not cleave the bait-like region, while the bait-like region changes its sequence to match the specificity of the proteases. If the former is true, one hypothesis is that parasite proteases continually evolve new specificities that do not cleave the bait-like region, while the bait-like region changes its sequence to match the specificity of the proteases. If the former is true, one hypothesis is that parasite proteases continually evolve new specificities that do not cleave the bait-like region, while the bait-like region changes its sequence to match the specificity of the proteases. Similar explanations have been proposed to account for the rapid evolution of other Drosophila immune system molecules (Begun and Whitley 2000).The evolution of GNBPs has been examined in both termites and Daphnia (Bulmer and Crozier 2005; Little et al  2004). Consistent with this, some other components of the immune system are positively selected in termites but not Drosophila (Bulmer and Crozier 2004; Jiggins and Kim 2005). The most detailed functional studies of insect TEPs have been on aTepI in Anopheles mosquitoes. Intriguingly, the sequence of the 280-amino acid-long C3d domain of aTepI is very variable, and it has been postulated that this may be responsible for variation in the ability of mosquitoes to transmit malaria (Blandin et al  2004). The function of these genes has been investigated using RNAi in cell culture, and it was found that TepII and TepIII are required for the efficient phagocytosis of E. coli and Staphylococcus aureus, respectively (Stroschein-Stevenson et al  2006). The corresponding region in vertebrate TEPs encodes the bait region of α2-macroglobulins and the anaphylatoxin fragment of complement protein C3 (Lagueux et al  2000). In the crustacean Daphnia, this region of a Tep gene evolves rapidly under positive selection (Little et al  2004). GNBP1 together with another pattern-recognition molecule, called PGRP-SA, is required to activate the Toll pathway in response to infection by gram-positive bacteria (Gobert et al  2003). It has also been reported that loss-of-function mutants in another gene, GNBP3, are sensitive to fungal infection, although the primary data to support this have yet to be published (Ferrandon et al  2004). One of these (CG13422) is also upregulated following fungal infection (De Gregorio et al  2001). Polymorphism data from Drosophila simulans for GNBP1 and part of TepI have previously been collected by Schlenke and Begun (2003). For this reason we only used inversion-free chromosomes for sequencing. In the sample from Gabon, 8 of 21 2L chromosome arms had inversions, and 10 inversion-free lines were retained for sequencing. In the Netherlands lines, all 16 of the 3L chromosome arms inspected were inversion-free, and 12 of these were retained for sequencing. Of 14 Netherlands 2R chromosome arms inspected, 13 were inversion-free. Despite this limitation, the innate immune response can recognise and eliminate a broad array of pathogens and parasites. The genome assemblies used were D. melanogaster Flybase release 4.0, D. pseudobscura Flybase release1.0, D. simulans Langley Group assembly 29/9/2004, D. yakuba Langley Group assembly 22/5/2004, D. mojavensis Agencourt Bioscience Corporation assembly 6/12/2004, D. virilis Agencourt assembly 29/10/2004, D. erecta Agencourt assembly 28/10/2004, and D. annanasae Agencourt assembly 6/12/2004. 