This could suggest that hypoglycemia early in the postoperative period may not have the same clinical implication as that in the medical ICU. The clinical data sets were created partly by chart review and partly by electronic data extraction. Finally, treatment improvements and initiatives would affect outcomes positively, while infection outbreaks would have a negative effect. Using a standardized institutional protocol and targeting a moderate BG range in early post–cardiac surgery patients maintained BG levels within target range for the SH and diabetes groups. A standardized institutional insulin infusion protocol was strictly implemented in the cardiothoracic ICU in late 2004, targeting a BG goal of 100 to 140 mg/dL. Insulin aspart was used as bolus insulin for meals and correction in both groups. Data ExtractionData were obtained by chart review and data mining of the hospital electronic medical record database from 2005 to 2008. Deep sternal wound infections were defined according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention definition30 and collected by the Department of Infection Control & Epidemiology. This finding has been reproduced in several other observational studies of mixed ICU populations,12,13 studies on post–acute myocardial infarction patients,14 and those on total parenteral nutrition administration.15 Additionally, several prospective studies have shown patients with SH to have improved morbidity and mortality, as well as better BG control.16,17 These studies suggest that elevated BG levels affect patients with both diabetes and SH, and that appropriate treatment may improve outcomes. Patients with left ventricular assist devices have prolonged hospitalizations, and this group was excluded from the surgical LOS analysis. The variables considered to be potential confounders from the univariate analysis were included in multiple regression models and then removed individually to examine the change in estimate of the exposure. A P value of ≤ 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Mortality OutcomesMortality rates within the first 30 days after surgery were similar between the 2 groups (3.4% for patients with diabetes and 2.3% for patients with SH; P = 0.2), as were mortality rates at 90 days (4.6% for patients with diabetes and 3.5% for patients with SH; P = 0.3). Improvements in DSWI and mortality rates in patients with diabetes by lowering BG targets to < 200 mg/dL were first described by the Portland group.1 An initial large trial16 in surgical ICU patients reported a significantly lower rate of morbidity and mortality by targeting euglycemia (BG, 80–110 mg/dL) compared with standard care. Postoperative ComplicationsRates of DSWI were higher in patients with diabetes compared with those with SH in unadjusted analysis and after adjust ing for type of surgery, (3.4% vs 1.6%; P = 0.01; Table 3). Surgical LOSPatients with diabetes had a longer mean surgical LOS than patients with SH (10.5 days vs 8.8 days; P < 0.002). However, after multivariate analysis, the difference in mean surgical LOS was no longer significant. Therefore, a BG goal of 100 to 140 mg/dL using insulin titration via the University of Michigan Hospital protocol was a reasonable and safe approach for hyperglycemia management in both groups. Additionally, fewer patients with diabetes (only 20%–30%) spent their time in the < 145 mg/dL BG range, unlike our study, in which > 50% of the BG levels of patients with diabetes were within target range. These contribute to the variable surgical LOS in our cohort. A higher rate of atrial fibrillation noted in the patients with SH can be explained by the higher proportion of valve replacements performed in this group. 