Importantly, whereas telomeres were gradually elongated with time in single TRF1 knockdown cells, telomere lengths remained unchanged in TRF1 and Pin1 double knockdown cells (Fig. These results together indicate that Pin1 regulates telomere maintenance by acting through the TRF1-dependent regulatory mechanism. 5a, b, S9), indicate a conserved function for TRF1 in regulating telomere length in mouse cells. Flow cytometry FISH (Flow-FISH) revealed that the fluorescence signals in total splenocytes (Fig. qFISH on metaphase chromosome spreads prepared from LPS-stimulated splenocytes confirmed that Pin1−/− cells contained much shorter telomeres than Pin1+/+ cells, with the average telomere fluorescence intensity being reduced by 34.7% (Fig. In addition, previous reports show several other accelerated aging phenotypes in Pin1−/− mice, including overall appearance, motor coordination defects, neuron degeneration, retina degeneration, testis atrophy and breast atrophy20,22,25. Our results have shown that Pin1 binds to the conserved pThr149-Pro motif in TRF1, promotes TRF1 turnover and inhibits its function to regulate telomere length in humans and mice. However, given the critical role of telomere length in aging1–3 and inhibition of Pin1 by multiple mechanisms including oxidative modification23,35, loss of Pin1-dependent regulation of TRF1 and telomere maintenance plays a key role in aging and age-related disease, most notably AD. Pin1 regulates several mitotic phosphoproteins including tau and APP that have well-known roles in AD, but is inhibited in diseased neurons18,22,23,26,35. Given the central role of Prodirected phosphorylation and Pin1 in diverse cellular processes and inhibition of Pin1 by oxidative damage, Pin1-catalyzed prolyl isomerization is a novel mechanism to help coordinate various cellular processes needed for preventing aging, and its deregulation contributes to age-related disease. Further studies how Pin1-dependent regulation is coordinated with other aging mechanisms and how Pin1 deregulation contributes to aging and age-related disease should help elucidate the molecular mechanisms of aging and might lead to new interventions for preventing or treating age-related disease. Recombinant proteins were expressed and purified from bacteria or synthesized using in vitro TNT system as described previously18,19. Protein kinase inhibitors are purchased from Calbiochem and used at the highest concentrations for inhibiting selective kinases, as recommended by the manufacturer. Phosphorylated Thr-Pro-specific monoclonal antibody was purchased from Cell signaling. The precipitated proteins were washed 4–6 times in the same buffer and subjected to immunoblotting analysis. Cells were harvested at each time points, and total lysates were analyzed by immunoblot with anti-TRF1, anti-Pin1, anti-tubulin, or anti-b-actin antibodies. The blots were scanned and semi-quantitated by using the software NIH image 1.6.2, as described previously12. To overexpress TERT and TER and to also knock down Pin1 expression in HT1080 cells, cells were sequentially infected with TERT retroviruses and TER lentiviruses and a day later with Pin1-shRNA lentiviruses or control vectors, followed by selection of triple stable cell pools. Cells were pelleted and resuspended in 500 µl of hybridization solution (70% formamide, 20 mM Tris, pH 7.0, 1% BSA, 0.3 µg/ml fluorescent isothiocyanate-conjugated (CCCTAA)3 peptide nucleic acid (PNA) probe (Applied Biosystems). For DNA counterstaining, cells were resuspended in 500 µl staining solution (PBS, 0.1% BSA, 10 µg/ml RNase A, 0.01 µg/ml LDS751) for 2h. X-ray and histological examinationsFor bone density, femurs and tibiae were harvested from Pin1+/+ and Pin1−/− mice and were analyzed with GE Locus eXplore µCT. Sections (5 µm) of three different regions of skin from Pin1+/+ and Pin1−/− mice were stained with Harris haematoxylin and eosin according to standard procedures. 1b), but this binding was abolished by a phosphatase treatment (Fig. TRF1 bound only to the WW domain, but not the PPIase domain of Pin1 (Fig. These results indicate that the Thr149-Pro motif is necessary for Pin1 binding and might be phosphorylated in cells. Only the Cdk inhibitor Roscovitine abolished the ability of TRF1 to interact with Pin1 (Fig. These results together indicate that Pin1 interacts with the pThr149-Pro motif in TRF1 in a phosphorylation-dependent and mitosis-specific manner. To confirm these results, we used a Pin1 dominant-negative mutant, GFP-S16A Pin1 WW domain mutant to inhibit Pin1 function in cells. 2g, h), indicating the requirements for both binding and isomerizing activities of Pin1. Importantly, Pin1-catalyzed postphosphorylation conformational changes can have profound effects on many key proteins in diverse cellular processes23. Pin1 knockdown did not inhibit telomerase activity (Fig. Although Pin1-shRNA effectively knocked down Pin1 in both cell lines, there was not detectable difference in telomere lengths between Pin1-shRNA and vector cells (Fig. 