Wild-type fibroblast cultures exhibited a consistent level of intercellular coupling (Figure 4C, left and 4D) despite a lack of distinct Cx43 staining at appositional membranes, indicating that intercellular communication between cardiac fibroblasts takes place through gap junctions that are smaller than and not as readily detectable as their myocyte counterparts. Two hours of AdVCx43 infection at an MOI of 100 resulted in an ~60% increase in Cx43 over control values (Figure 5). Clearly, additional studies will be required to determine which specific phosphorylation sites, or combination thereof, are critical for gap junctional communication in native cardiac fibroblasts.Furthermore, Cx45 from native fibroblasts also exhibited faster electrophoretic mobility compared to that from myocytes. Connexin Expression Levels are a Determinant of Gap Junctional Communication in Adult Ventricular FibroblastsOur native cardiac fibroblast cultures exhibited diffuse, punctate Cx43 immunoreactive signal (Figure 1). Our data also demonstrate that the extent of intercellular coupling of cardiac fibroblast cultures depends, at least in part, on the level of Cx43 expression. Zhang et al  [Zhang et al  2003a; Zhang et al  2003b] showed that Cx43 expression results in decreased S-phase kinase-associated protein 2 (Skp2) stability, increased cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor, p27, and reduced cell proliferation. We and others have shown that Cx45 expressed in gap junctions containing Cx43 significantly reduces intercellular coupling [Yamada et al  2003; Koval et al  1995]. Second, as discussed above, phosphorylation of Cx43 on ser325/ser328/ser330 by casein kinase 1 is crucial for gap junction assembly as well as efficient dye transfer [Lampe et al  2006]. Additional studies will be required to establish the extent and functional role of heterocellular coupling in normal and diseased hearts, and whether there are differences in species ranging from mice to man. The Expanding Role of Cardiac FibroblastsAlthough the main role of fibroblasts in the heart is considered to be synthesis and maintenance of the mechanical scaffold enveloping cardiac myocytes, it is increasingly appreciated that they also contribute to sensing and reacting to the changing milieu in the heart via communication with other resident cell types. The genotypes of all mice were determined by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) as described previously [Johnson et al  1999]. The genotypes of all mice were determined by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) as described previously [Johnson et al  1999]. The genotypes of all mice were determined by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) as described previously [Johnson et al  1999]. The genotypes of all mice were determined by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) as described previously [Johnson et al  1999]. The genotypes of all mice were determined by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) as described previously [Johnson et al  1999]. The TSA procedure requires three major steps: (1) incorporation of horseradish peroxidase (HRP), (2) treatment with Biotinyl Tyramide Amplification Reagent (NEN), and (3) visualization with fluorophore-conjugated streptavidin as follows. For DDR2 staining, biotinylated donkey anti-goat secondary antibody (1:200, Jackson) was used, followed by streptavidin with HRP (1:300, NEN) (step 1). For α-SMA staining, as stated above, the primary antibody contained HRP (step 1). For Cx43 staining, EnVision™+ anti-mouse with HRP secondary antibody (neat, Dako) was used (step 1). Subsequently, slides were incubated in Biotinyl Tyramide Amplification Reagent (1:300, NEN) for 10 min (step 2), followed by Cy2- or Cy3-conjugated streptavidin (1:500, Jackson) for 30 min (step 3) and Hoechst nuclear stain (1:10,000, Cambrex Bioscience, Walkersville, MD) for 10 min for fluorescence visualization.For cadherin staining, mouse anti-pan-cadherin (1:300, Sigma) followed by Cy3-conjugated goat anti-mouse secondary antibody (1:200, Jackson) was used.Immunofluorescence images were photographed using an AxioCam digital camera attached to an Olympus BX60 microscope. Thus, fibroblasts may influence cardiac function not only by extracellular matrix remodeling [Eghbali et al 1989; Cleutjens et al  1994], but also by modulating active and passive electrical properties, and thereby influencing (slowing) impulse propagation. Protein bands were visualized using Western Lightning Chemiluminescence Reagent Plus (Perkin Elmer LAS, Boston, MA). Immunoblots were quantified by densitometric analysis using Adobe Photoshop.In some experiments, cell extracts were incubated in the presence (0.1 U/μg protein) or absence of alkaline phosphatase (Roche) at 37°C in a shaking water bath for 3 hr. Samples were then subjected to immunoblot analysis as described above. After incubation for 2 min at 37°C, the monolayers were rinsed three times with PBS, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, mounted, and photographed using a fluorescence microscope and Nikon Coolpix 995 camera. One reason for this may be that gap junctional plaques connecting fibroblasts alone or fibroblasts and myocytes are likely to be structurally more discrete and much smaller than those connecting myocytes. One reason for this may be that gap junctional plaques connecting fibroblasts alone or fibroblasts and myocytes are likely to be structurally more discrete and much smaller than those connecting myocytes. Statistical AnalysisAll values are expressed as mean ± S.D. Fibroblasts obtained from second or third passages appeared to undergo differentiation, exhibited altered morphology and produced a collagen matrix that interfered with dye transfer and immunostaining experiments. We used the protein bands (40–45 kD) in the dried gel to normalize the connexin protein values obtained in Figure 2. Cx45 expression was not significantly different (p = 0.205) between the two cell types. Fibroblasts express Cx43 detected on immunoblots as protein bands at 41–46 kD. 