Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death, annually resulting in more than one million deaths worldwide. 6) but larger sample sets are required to determine the statistical significance. We have found an array of mutations in PTEN, PI3K genes and AKT genes—all members of the insulin/PI3K/AKT signalling arm of this pathway (Fig. As expected, tumours with higher grade had accumulated more mutations than tumours of lower grade (P=0.001; Supplementary Fig. As expected, tumours with higher grade had accumulated more mutations than tumours of lower grade (P=0.001; Supplementary Fig. Other genes in which the mutation frequency positively correlated with tumour grade were LRP1B (P=0.013), INHBA (P=0.013) and PRKDC (P=0.018). A total of 247 megabases of tumour DNA sequence was analysed to identify putative mutations, and non-synonymous mutations were validated by orthogonal methods or confirmed by independent polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification and sequencing (Supplementary Methods and Supplementary Fig. Our analysis shows that tumours of higher stage had accumulated more mutations than tumours of lower stage (P=0.006; Supplementary Fig. Our analysis shows that tumours of higher stage had accumulated more mutations than tumours of lower stage (P=0.006; Supplementary Fig. Our analysis shows that tumours of higher stage had accumulated more mutations than tumours of lower stage (P=0.006; Supplementary Fig. There are several subclasses of lung adenocarcinoma, including acinar, papillary, BAC (bronchioloalveolar carcinoma) and solid, on the basis of World Health Organization standards49,50. Of note, 16 of 25 tumours without discovered mutations in the 623 genes are from the group with higher stromal contamination rate (Supplementary Table 17), suggesting that stromal contamination might reduce the sensitivity in discovering mutations. Our study represents to our knowledge the largest effort so far to characterize genomic alterations in lung adenocarcinoma. Although the analysis of the 188 TSP tumours is the largest tumourtype-specific screen for mutations to date, it does not have complete power to detect some genes known to be associated with lung cancer. These samples were snap-frozen, anonymized and contributed along with matched normal samples by the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, University of Michigan, and Washington University in St Louis. Additional data were generated until more than 90% of targeted exonic and splice-site bases were covered by at least one sequence read. Additional data were generated until more than 90% of targeted exonic and splice-site bases were covered by at least one sequence read. Further data were generated using orthogonal technologies to validate the candidate somatic mutations. Further data were generated using orthogonal technologies to validate the candidate somatic mutations. Further data were generated using orthogonal technologies to validate the candidate somatic mutations. Synonymous somatic mutations identified in 250 genes were used to estimate the background mutation rate, which was used in statistical calculations to identify significantly mutated genes. Statistical approaches were used to identify significantly mutated pathways. Although smoking is unquestionably the leading cause of lung cancer, approximately 10% of cases occur in patients who have never smoked3. PTPRD, previously shown to be deleted in lung adenocarcinoma34,35, is also found to be frequently mutated34. Of particular interest, four of the six most highly mutated tumours have mutations in PRKDC, which encodes a protein involved in the repair of double-stranded DNA breaks44 (Fig. Of particular interest, four of the six most highly mutated tumours have mutations in PRKDC, which encodes a protein involved in the repair of double-stranded DNA breaks44 (Fig. We also determined that a set of genes including EGFR (P = 0.05) and PTEN (P = 0.03) tended to be mutated in tumours with lower-than-average mutation rates. Mutations in EGFR and PTEN may have strong tumour-growth-promoting capability and thereby reduce the selection pressure for acquiring further mutations. Subsets of the TSP tumour collection were analysed using SNP array (n = 383), re-sequencing (n = 188) and gene expression array (n = 75). The amplification of EPHA3 and KDR (Supplementary Figs 4 and 5) seen in two tumours each, indicates that these genes are probably proto-oncogenes. Notably, three of the six tumours with the highest EGFR amplification also have mutations in EGFR, and five of the six tumours with the highest KRAS amplification also harbour KRAS mutations (Supplementary Table 11). 