The elevated STI risk for Blacks irrespective of individual risk behaviors26 is likely due to higher STI prevalence in this sub-population and assortative mixing by race. However, behavioral disinhibition was moderated by family involvement and this may be a particularly effective intervention target. However, the consistency of the predictors of STI across gender suggests that despite differences in antecedent influences, intervention targets can be uniform for males and females. Finally, our study sample was primarily white and these findings should be tested for replication in other racial ethnic groups. The impact of these SRB on risk for STI was clear and consistent across gender, despite differential influence of several precursors to the risk behaviors. Programs targeting more distal influences on SRB (such as behavioral disinhibition, social skills, and interaction with antisocial friends) may be more effective than those aimed at reducing the behaviors themselves. We also hypothesized that early life individual and environmental factors would independently predict STI. Detailed information on the measures is available in Supplementary Table 1.Sexually transmitted infection (STI)At each of 8 assessments starting at age 18, participants were asked if they had ever been told by a doctor or nurse that they had an STI (HIV/AIDS, gonorrhea, syphilis, chlamydia, genital warts, genital herpes, or other STI). and summed, then standardized.Environmental factorsAll environmental factors were measured at 4 timepoints (ages 11-14) using a four-point scale (1=NO! A school bonding 5-item scale reflected the degree to which participants liked their teachers and classes and wanted to do well in school.Demographic controlsChildhood socioeconomic status (SES) was measured as school report of eligibility for the National School Breakfast/Lunch program from ages 6-13 (qualifiction in any year was classified as lower SES). Statistical AnalysesIn bivariate analyses, we compared characteristics of participants with and without STI using Poisson regression with robust standard errors18,19 to generate risk ratios (RR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI). Interactions were tested in the full sample and models were also stratified by gender. Interactions were tested in the full sample and models were also stratified by gender. In contrast, 90% reported inconsistent condom use between ages 18-24/25. During adolescence, females reported greater social skills (z-scorefemale=0.10, z-scoremale=-0.06, p<0.05), more family involvement (z-scorefemale=.09, z-scoremale=−0.10, p<0.01), and more school bonding (z-scorefemale=.14, z-scoremale=-0.12, p<0.001) than males. Therefore, these models were developed separately by gender. In tests of interactions in the full sample, only the interaction between behavioral disinhibition and family involvement in the model predicting lifetime number of partners was significant (p=.02).Sex under the influenceHaving sex under the influence of alcohol or drugs was strongly predicted by behavioral disinhibition as well as by having antisocial peers, and this was consistent across gender (Table 2). When only individual and environmental factors were considered, social skills were associated with significantly reduced risk of STI, whereas antisocial peers and behavioral disinhibition increased risk. In the combined model with SRB and individual and environmental factors, number of sex partners and inconsistent condom use remained strongly associated with STI; higher social skills remained significantly associated with reduced risk of STI. The most consistent predictor of SRB was having antisocial peers in early adolescence. The importance of social skills in risk reduction for women may partly explain the effectiveness of the SISTA intervention which included social skills development.23 For males, the lower risk of STI associated with high social skills despite higher numbers of partners may be partly due to the networks in which they are embedded. 