Sensory loss in diabetic DSP is generally restricted to a stocking distribution. Sensory loss in diabetic DSP is generally restricted to a stocking distribution. Even if the relationship between diabetes and CIDP is spurious, their coexistence poses a therapeutic challenge. Such findings should prompt additional testing for conditions associated with CIPD, such as an underlying monoclonal gammopathy. They are characterized by subacute onset of painful sensations in the legs, progressing over days to weeks to unremitting burning dysesthesias and allodynia [1, 9], with occasional spread to proximal sites involving the trunk or more diffusely [2••, 85]. These neuropathies involve small nerve fibers that are not evaluated by conventional neurophysiological studies [85, 86], and documentation of an SFN requires additional testing, including measures of thermal thresholds, R-R variation, sweat production, orthostatic blood pressure, and skin biopsy [87]. Weight loss usually precedes the onset of severe burning pain and allodynia, but sometimes develops at the onset of pain or even as the pain subsides [1, 2••]. Worsening of retinal examination findings in parallel with treatment-induced DN supports a common pathophysiology [87]. However, robust agreement between clinical and electrophysiological findings, not blind reliance on mild NCS abnormalities, should guide treatment decisions. In a second study, instructions to base clinical diagnoses on unequivocally abnormal symptoms and signs, while taking age, sex, and physical variables into account, greatly improved proficiency and avoided overreporting of signs [11••]. The 2009 Toronto Consensus Panel concluded that composite sum scores based on normal deviates (from percentiles) using NCS attributes sensitive to DPS (e.g., fibular and tibial conduction velocity, sural amplitude) performed best in diagnosing DSP [7••]. The 2009 Toronto Consensus Panel concluded that composite sum scores based on normal deviates (from percentiles) using NCS attributes sensitive to DPS (e.g., fibular and tibial conduction velocity, sural amplitude) performed best in diagnosing DSP [7••]. This approach is not readily available in most medical practices, but more easily applied criteria (e.g., use of one or more abnormal attributes in two separate lower extremity nerves based on the first and the 99th percentile values) also performed well [7••]. The quantitative nature of NCSs might suggest they are reliable indicators of abnormality. Classification into “typical” or “atypical” forms is based on their occurrence [2••], with the most typical form of DN being a chronic, distal (length-dependent) symmetric polyneuropathy (DSP) that accounts for about 75% of DNs [4]. The 2009 Toronto Consensus Panel defined SFN [5] to include three categories: possible (length-dependent symptoms and/or signs of small-fiber damage), probable (length-dependent symptoms, clinical signs, and normal sural NCS findings), and definite (fulfilling definition of probable plus abnormal IENFD at the ankle or quantitative thermal threshold at the foot) [5]. These additional mechanisms include increased formation of advanced glycation end products [26, 27], downregulation of the soluble receptor for advanced glycation end products [28], activation of polyol aldose reductase signaling with accumulation of protein kinase C [24, 29], activation of poly(ADP ribose) polymerase [30], cyclooxygenase 2 activation [31], endothelial dysfunction [26], peroxynitrite and protein nitration [32], and altered function of the Na+/K+-ATPase pump [26, 33], all having direct impact on neuronal activity, mitochondrial function, membrane permeability, and endothelial function. Emerging data suggest that DSP may occur before development of diabetic-range hyperglycemia in individuals with features of metabolic syndrome or in patients with impaired glucose tolerance [2••].The pathogenesis of diabetic DSP is multifactorial and involves many interrelated mechanisms. The Diabetes Control and Complications Trial and the Epidemiology of Diabetes Interventions and Complications (EDIC) follow-up study strongly demonstrated that intensive glycemic control designed to achieve near-normal blood glucose level, implemented early in the course of diabetes, delays development of DSP in patients with type 1 diabetes [48••, 49, 50••]. The Action to Control Cardiovascular Risk in Diabetes (ACCORD) study of patients with type 2 diabetes reported significant reductions in the development of DSP after 5 years of intensive versus conventional glycemic control [57•]. One possibility is that an integrated pharmacologic strategy, combining several agents targeting the various mechanisms important to DSP, will be required to supplement glycemic control and lifestyle interventions before DSP can be prevented or effectively controlled in the long term. One possibility is that an integrated pharmacologic strategy, combining several agents targeting the various mechanisms important to DSP, will be required to supplement glycemic control and lifestyle interventions before DSP can be prevented or effectively controlled in the long term. Several atypical DNs have subacute onset (days to weeks), a monophasic or relapsing course, and preferentially involve small sensory and autonomic or motor nerve fibers. DRPN presents subacutely with unilateral or asymmetric proximal pain involving the back, hip, or anterior thigh [7••, 74]. Needle EMG abnormalities involve nerve roots, the plexus, and individual nerves, and autonomic testing confirms the presence of small-fiber involvement. However, efficacy is unproven, and no evidence convincingly supports the use of any immunotherapy treatment [72••, 79]. 