Retrieval mechanisms also exist to return a number of trans-Golgi network (TGN)-resident proteins, such as TGN38/46 (Ghosh et al , 2003) or apo-hydrolase receptors to the TGN, where these receptors receive newly synthesised cargo for subsequent rounds of endosomal delivery (Lin et al , 2004). Such data suggests that the majority of large, swollen vesicles are late endosomal in origin, whereas the smaller-diameter vacuoles appear to have early endosomal characteristics.Overall, these data suggest that PIKfyve suppression alters normal endosomal homeostasis, such that although early and late endosomal characteristics are maintained, membrane trafficking is perturbed in such a way as to leading to early and late endosomal swelling. Elegant studies have demonstrated that this lipid plays an essential role in sorting events, such as the inclusion of activated EGF receptors within MVBs (Petiot et al , 2003), rather than bulk transport of cargo through the endosomal system. In addition, there is evidence of a role for its 5′-phosphorylation product phosphatidylinositol (3,5)-bisphosphate [PtdIns(3,5)P2] in regulating both endosomal sorting and endomembrane homeostasis (Michell et al , 2006). Using live and fixed cell confocal imaging, we have presented evidence that in HeLa cells expressing low levels of a GFP-tagged PIKfyve chimera, the enzyme is localised to dynamic cytosolic punctae that are enriched in early, rather than late endosomal markers. Having said this, other studies have shown that overexpressed PIKfyve associates most strongly with late endosomes and MVBs (Shisheva et al , 2001; Ikonomov et al , 2001). Consistent with a certain level of conserved function, studies employing overexpression of a dominant-negative, catalytically dead version of PIKfyve (the PIKfyveK1831E mutant), have reported the formation of enlarged endosome-like structures in a variety of mammalian cell types (Ikonomov et al , 2001). The first of these are the large, swollen structures that are easily visible under phase contrast. The second vesicular population is smaller in diameter and more difficult to observe under phase contrast. Supporting such a conclusion, conditions of PIKfyve suppression that induce the formation of large, swollen late endosomal structures, do not result in a detectable defect in the endosomal sorting and degradation of internalised EGF receptor or the endosomal recycling of transferrin receptor. Further support for a role of PIKfyve in endosome-to-TGN retrograde transport is the evidence that PIKfyve interacts with p40, a Rab9 effector implicated in retrograde traffic from the late endosome (Ikonomov et al , 2003b). Moreover, the identification of a number of potential mammalian PtdIns(3,5)P2 effectors that lie on this pathway, including the mammalian proteins sorting nexin-1 (Cozier et al , 2002; Carlton et al , 2004) and the Svp1p orthologue WIPI49 (Jeffries et al , 2004), is entirely consistent with a role for PIKfyve and its lipid product PtdIns(3,5)P2 in endosome-to-TGN transport. With the recent identification of PIKfyve mutations in patients with Francois-Neetens mouchetée fleck corneal dystrophy (Li et al , 2005) –here corneal flecks form possibly through generation of abnormal keratocytes that are swollen as a result of enlarged cytosolic vesicles (Nicholson et al , 1977) – our data suggest that part of the underlying cause of this disease may be a defect in retrograde endosome-to-TGN trafficking. The CD8 antibody used for decorating the CD8-chimeras was the mouse monoclonal UCHT4 (Ancell, Bayport, Minnesota), it was illuminated by an Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated anti-mouse antibody (Invitrogen, Paisley, UK). The trans-Golgi network was stained using a sheep anti-TGN46 antibody (Serotec, Oxford, UK), followed by staining with an Alexa Fluor 568-conjugated anti-sheep antibody (Invitrogen). Cells were incubated for a further 72 hours. Cells were placed on ice and cell-surface bound 125I-transferrin was stripped off using ice-cold 0.2 M acetic acid, 0.5 M NaCl, pH 4.5 for 2 minutes, then washed extensively with ice-cold PBS. At the end of each time point, medium was removed and separated into acid-precipitable material (recycled counts) and acid-soluble material (degraded counts) by incubation with 3% trichloroacetic acid, 0.3% phosphotungstic acid for 30 minutes at 4°C followed by high-speed centrifugation. Consistent with this, a number of studies have identified various proteins known to be involved in MVB sorting, including mVps24, Ent3p and Ent5p, as potential PtdIns(3,5)P2 effectors (Friant et al , 2003; Whitley et al , 2003; Eugster et al , 2004; Michell et al , 2006). Counts present in each fraction were determined by counting γ-radiation. Recycled counts were determined by summing acid-precipitable counts and counts removed by the acetic acid strip. Anti-CD8 uptake experimentsThe uptake experiments were performed as previously described (Carlton et al , 2005). Degree of colocalisation was measured using Metamorph software (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA) by acquiring the area of CD8- and TGN46-staining and measuring the percentage of CD8-positive area included in the TGN46-positive area. Whereas Vac14p is required for proper degradative traffic (Dove et al , 2002), Vac7p is required for correct retrograde vacuole-to-TGN traffic (Bonangelino et al , 1997), suggesting that Vac7p-dependent PtdIns(3,5)P2 production is required for this retrieval step. Further evidence in favour of a role for PtdIns(3,5)P2 in vacuole-to-Golgi retrieval has stemmed from the characterisation of Svp1p (Atg18p) (Dove et al , 2004). Whereas this vacuolation induces swollen MVBs with fewer intraluminal vesicles and impairs soluble uptake of horseradish peroxidase, it does not affect trafficking of the transferrin receptor or the degradation of internalised EGF receptor (Ikonomov et al , 2003a). Additionally, PIKfyve has been shown to be associated with p40, a Rab9 effector required for retrieval of the cation-independent mannose 6-phosphate receptor (CI-MPR) from endosome to TGN, leading to the suggestion that PIKfyve regulates this pathway (Ikonomov et al , 2003b). Supporting this, WIPI49, a mammalian orthologue of Svp1p (Dove et al , 2004), controls endosome-to-TGN retrieval of the CI-MPR (Jeffries et al , 2004). GFP-PIKfyve is enriched on early, rather than late endosomesPrevious studies have established that transiently transfected PIKfyve is localised to cytosolic punctae through an ability of its FYVE domain to associate with PtdIns(3)P (Shisheva et al , 2001; Ikonomov et al , 2001; Sbrissa et al , 2002). Consistent with previous data (Sbrissa et al , 2002), association with these punctae was dependent upon phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI 3-kinase) activity, because incubation with wortmannin (100 nM for 10 minutes) resulted in dissociation of GFP-PIKfyve into the cytosol (supplementary material Fig. 1C, Table 1, and data not shown). Cells were imaged at one frame per second over a 10-minute period. siRNA-mediated suppression of endogenous PIKfyveThe majority of studies examining the role of PIKfyve in endosomal function have relied upon overexpression of either wild-type PIKfyve or a kinase-dead mutant (PIKfyveK1831E) that has been proposed to function as a dominant-negative kinase (Ikonomov et al , 2001). A similar level of suppression was observed with siRNA duplex V (data not shown), whereas the remaining siRNAs gave much lower levels of suppression (Fig. 