Human neuroimaging studies have shown that viewing pictures of appetizing foods can lead to activation close to this region (Simmons et al , 2005). This is in good agreement with our findings, except that the anterior insula might be processing the biological significance of all stimuli, not just intra-oral stimuli (Kurth et al , 2010). Another possibility could relate to the antero-posterior dimension, with the anterior part of the insular cortex being positive and the posterior part negative. Tsukiura and Cabeza (2011) analyzed the neural basis of the “beauty-as-good” intuition by having subjects perform attractiveness ratings for faces as well as “action goodness” ratings for short sentences describing hypothetical actions of individuals. Tsukiura and Cabeza (2011) analyzed the neural basis of the “beauty-as-good” intuition by having subjects perform attractiveness ratings for faces as well as “action goodness” ratings for short sentences describing hypothetical actions of individuals. Parametric analysis of neural areas whose activity varied systematically with these two ratings showed that a part of the right insular cortex decreased in activity with increasing ratings of both attractiveness and moral goodness. Finally, it should be pointed out that the insula is strongly responsive to autonomic parameters such as heart rate and blood pressure (Critchley, 2005; Critchley et al , 2004), and so it is likely that autonomic changes that are induced by the perception of attractive stimuli are contributing to the observed activations in the insula. In addition, we observed surprisingly little convergence of ALE foci across the individual gustation and olfaction analyses, despite strong expectations in the literature for such a convergence for flavor processing. Most of the overlap for these two modalities was seen in the ventral part of the cingulate cortex (the pregenual ACC) in BA 32. While our meta-analyses did not include negative valence, several of the studies within them did perform comparisons between valences, and some were supportive of a mediolateral distinction for valence. While our meta-analyses did not include negative valence, several of the studies within them did perform comparisons between valences, and some were supportive of a mediolateral distinction for valence. While our meta-analyses did not include negative valence, several of the studies within them did perform comparisons between valences, and some were supportive of a mediolateral distinction for valence. An influential alternative to the basic emotion theory, that put forward by Ortony et al  (1988), makes clear that aesthetic pleasure is an object-related emotion, whereas happiness is an outcome-related emotion. For example, Small et al  (2001) had subjects eat chocolate to beyond satiety. Finally, Zald et al  (2002) found medial OFC activation for the consumption of both pleasant (sugar) and aversive (quinine) solutions, with no mediolateral differences across valence. Further work is needed to resolve the important issue of valence coding in both the OFC and insula. The basic model of aesthetic processing that we propose involves an interaction between interoceptive and exteroceptive processing via recurrent connectivity between anterior insula and OFC, respectively, as shown in Fig. See Barrett et al  (2007) for a similar model. See Barrett et al  (2007) for a similar model. We propose that recurrent connectivity between the anterior insula and the OFC can mediate what Craig (2009) calls “homeostatic emotions” and thus the assignment of valence to objects as a function of current homeostatic state. Taylor et al  (2009) used fMRI to examine resting-state connectivity between the various divisions of the insula and cingulate cortex. One of their major findings was strong resting-state connectivity between the anterior insula and the most rostral part of the cingulate (BA 32; pregenual anterior cingulate). Finally, we include the ventral basal ganglia in this circuit, which are considered to be among the “hedonic hotspots” of the brain (Berridge et al , 2009). For that, we need to switch the focus to social needs and the emotions associated with them. Evolutionary scenarios for the arts invoke the mechanisms of sexual selection and group selection to explain these capacities (Brown, 2000; Brown and Dissanayake, 2009; Miller, 2000; Voland and Grammer, 2003). So, while the rewarding properties of the arts derive most likely from social needs rather than homeostatic needs, similar neural circuitry seems to be involved in responding to attractive faces and alluring music as to desirable foods. So, while the rewarding properties of the arts derive most likely from social needs rather than homeostatic needs, similar neural circuitry seems to be involved in responding to attractive faces and alluring music as to desirable foods. So, while the rewarding properties of the arts derive most likely from social needs rather than homeostatic needs, similar neural circuitry seems to be involved in responding to attractive faces and alluring music as to desirable foods. inclusion criteria for papersMeta-analysis of 93 published neuroimaging studies was performed using “activation likelihood estimation” (ALE) analysis. While we intended to include touch as a fifth sensory-specific analysis, there was an insufficient number of papers dealing with positive-valenced evaluation in order to do so (see Francis et al , 1999; Rolls et al , 2003).Coordinates for activation foci from conditional contrasts were taken from the original publications. While we intended to include touch as a fifth sensory-specific analysis, there was an insufficient number of papers dealing with positive-valenced evaluation in order to do so (see Francis et al , 1999; Rolls et al , 2003).Coordinates for activation foci from conditional contrasts were taken from the original publications. ALE meta-analyses were performed using GingerALE 2.0.1a3 (brainmap.org). Human neuroimaging studies have convincingly shown that the brain areas that mediate aesthetic responses to artworks overlap those that mediate the appraisal of objects of evolutionary importance, such as the desirability of food items or the attractiveness of potential mates. To do this, we binarized the four individual FDR-corrected maps and computed a probabilistic map of each voxel’s engagement across the four modalities. No voxel in the brain was concordantly engaged in all four modalities (“4-of-4” analysis). In other words, the OFC showed a more sensory-specific than supramodal pattern of activation. There was overlap between gustation and olfaction and between gustation and vision in the pregenual ACC (ventral BA 32), although this area is not typically found in published work on flavor processing. Four of the six studies of musical pleasantness did (Blood and Zatorre, 2001; Brown et al , 2004; Koelsch et al , 2006; Menon and Levitin, 2005), while only one of the five studies of visual artworks did (Di Dio et al , 2007). 