Variable rates of chromosome mis-segregation were observed in the original hybrid strains both for different Robertsonian translocations and in male and female mice ranging from 4 to 26% when mating two compound heterozgyotes (Gropp et al  1974). We have not evaluated the rate of chromosome mis-segregation in strains carrying Robertsonian fusion chromosomes after backcrossing; however, the presence of multiple resorbed embryos in most litters (Table 1) suggests that trisomic embryos are being produced. We have not evaluated the rate of chromosome mis-segregation in strains carrying Robertsonian fusion chromosomes after backcrossing; however, the presence of multiple resorbed embryos in most litters (Table 1) suggests that trisomic embryos are being produced. Consistent with this idea is the observation that while only half of the pregnancies aimed at obtaining trisomy 16 and trisomy 19 yielded trisomic embryos when harvested between E13.5 and E15.5, nearly all contain resorbed embryos. We complement our studies of constitutional trisomic HSCs with the analysis of HSCs harboring random aneuploidies that are generated by mouse models with increased rates of chromosome mis-segregation. Similar perturbations in the myeloid lineage were observed in HSCs derived from trisomy 21 induced pluripotent stem cells (Chou et al  2012; Maclean et al  2012). Additionally, leukemias and lymphomas are often transplantable and amenable to manipulation in culture, making this a potentially powerful system to assess the role of cellular aneuploidy in tumorigenesis in the future without requiring repeated isolations of trisomic fetal liver cells. This system will greatly expand the range of our in vivo analysis model, allowing us to assess the combinations of many aneuploidies and oncogenes on the kinetics of transformation in leukemia and lymphoma in mice and enabling us to test the effect of aneuploidy-targeting drugs (Tang et al  2011) in aneuploid blood cancers. We hope that our findings and future work using this system will help clarify the effects of aneuploidy in DS and provide insight into the precise role of aneuploidy in cancer. By utilizing transplantation, the fitness of a range of aneuploid hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) can be evaluated in the context of an otherwise euploid organism. Blood contains many cell types, yet all blood cells are derived from a common precursor, the HSC. HSCs are found in the bone marrow in adult mice and humans, where they are mostly quiescent (Sun et al  2015; Busch et al  2015); however, HSCs undergo several migrations during embryonic development to reach the bone marrow (Figure 2). Primitive hematopoiesis begins around embryonic day 7.5 (E7.5) with the emergence of yolk sac blood islands, which primarily produce primitive erythroid cells (Baron et al  2012; Mikkola and Orkin 2006). These cells then migrate to the developing fetal liver around E11.5, where they rapidly expand for several days (Morrison et al  1995) before gradually entering circulation around E15.5 (Christensen et al  2004). However, when non-irradiated donor HSCs are supplied by injection of fetal liver or bone marrow cell suspensions into the bloodstream, these HSCs home to the bone marrow and rapidly proliferate to reconstitute the blood and promote long-term survival of the irradiated recipient mouse (Figure 3). Taken together, HSCs provide a tractable cellular system to study the effects of aneuploidy in vivo for several reasons. First, HSCs can be isolated from both embryos and adults from the fetal liver and the bone marrow, respectively, allowing for a range of aneuploid models to be tested. Because we are particularly interested in evaluating the effects of aneuploidy on cellular fitness in vivo, we sought to utilize this transplantation system in particular to study trisomic HSCs. Rb 13.16) are crossed to mice homozygous for another Robertsonian translocation that includes one chromosome found in the first Robertsonian translocation fused with another chromosome (e.g. Rb 13.16) are crossed to mice homozygous for another Robertsonian translocation that includes one chromosome found in the first Robertsonian translocation fused with another chromosome (e.g. Rb 13.16) are crossed to mice homozygous for another Robertsonian translocation that includes one chromosome found in the first Robertsonian translocation fused with another chromosome (e.g. Indeed, matings of these feral strains with different laboratory strains led to strain-specific differences in trisomic embryo survival (Gropp et al  1983). Our lab undertook the effort of backcrossing a number of mouse strains harboring Robertsonian translocations into the inbred mouse strain C57BL/6J. Such large genomic alterations affect a multitude of cellular processes, from transcription and translation, to protein folding and degradation. Such large genomic alterations affect a multitude of cellular processes, from transcription and translation, to protein folding and degradation. Backcrossing the Robertsonian strains into an inbred line both reduces lethality due to histoincompatibility and ensures the phenotypes observed are due to differences in the donor HSCs and not a consequence of delayed graft rejection in the recipients. Timed matings were employed to harvest trisomic embryos at E13.5 or E14.5, when HSCs could be readily isolated from fetal livers. Trisomy 19 embryos were obtained at an even higher frequency (White et al  1974a; 1974b). 