6) provided that two MT channels were located only at the tips of R2 and R3 stereocilia at the lower ends of the tip links. When the focal plane was at the base of the bundle, the amplitude of the signal in R2 was reduced but in R1 it was increased as observed experimentally, consistent with the reverse diffusion hypothesis. The experimental observations are best matched by simulations in which both MT channels are sited at the lower ends of the tip links. The present results agree with another confocal study4 in which line-scan measurements suggested the site of calcium entry was within 1 μm of the tip of the stereocilium, a resolution that did not allow discriminating between top or side of the stereocilia. The present results agree with another confocal study4 in which line-scan measurements suggested the site of calcium entry was within 1 μm of the tip of the stereocilium, a resolution that did not allow discriminating between top or side of the stereocilia. In the present work, a similar calcium imaging approach was used but the spatial resolution was enhanced by using mammalian cochlear inner hair cells where the step in height between rows of large-diameter stereocilia allowed individual stereocilia to be imaged at the apical portion of the bundle. The current view is that the tip link is comprised of two intertwined molecules of cadherin23 at the upper end and two of protocadherin15 at the lower end 9. Another advantage of the two channels at the bottom end of the link is that it avoids the negative cooperativity that might arise with channels at each end of the tip link where the opening of one channel relieves the force on the other16. Another advantage of the two channels at the bottom end of the link is that it avoids the negative cooperativity that might arise with channels at each end of the tip link where the opening of one channel relieves the force on the other16. The prevailing view is that, during bundle deflection, calcium enters stereocilia through channels at the upper end of the tip link, interacts with myosin-1 causing the upper attachment point of the tip link to slip down the side wall, thereby reducing tension in the link and relieving stress on the channel. Measurements indicated that calcium signals arising in the first row of stereocilia were smaller in amplitude and slower to develop than in either the second or third rows supporting the conclusion that MT channels are not located in the first row. Patch pipettes were filled with an intracellular solution of composition (in mM): 135 CsCl, 2.5 MgCl2, 1 EGTA, 2.5 Na2ATP, 5 Creatine phosphate, 2 NaAscorbate, 10 CsHEPES, pH 7.2. Patch pipettes were filled with an intracellular solution of composition (in mM): 135 CsCl, 2.5 MgCl2, 1 EGTA, 2.5 Na2ATP, 5 Creatine phosphate, 2 NaAscorbate, 10 CsHEPES, pH 7.2. The swept-field confocal utilizes a stationary slit scanned with a galvanometer-driven beam also at 500 Hz and synchronized to the camera acquisition speed. The axial resolution of the confocal system with the 35 μm slit was determined from the axial intensity variation for 0.1 μm fluorescent beads, focused with a stepping motor at 0.5 μm intervals. The axial resolution of the confocal system with the 35 μm slit was determined from the axial intensity variation for 0.1 μm fluorescent beads, focused with a stepping motor at 0.5 μm intervals. This software also generated the voltage and pressure pulses which were fed through a Digidata 1320 DA converter to run the experiment. Calcium was assumed to enter through two MT channels each carrying 2.5 pA of calcium current (inner hair cell MT channels 15 pA of which 15 per cent is carried by calcium12). Film 2Supplementary Video 2 Calcium fluorescence in an outer hair cell stereociliary bundle during stimulation. Measurements on other cells yielded a ratio of peak fluorescence in R2 to that in R1, FR2/ FR1, of 10.2 ± 0.8 in 15 inner hair cells using the low affinity dye Fluo-4FF which has a calcium dissociation constant, KD, of 10 μM. R2 and R3 therefore behaved similarly with large fast changes while R1 responded more slowly and weakly. In recordings from more than 50 inner hair cells with MT currents up to 1 nA, no convincing evidence of signals in the first row was ever seen. In contrast in R1, small signals were measured at all three positions but paradoxically the amplitude increased towards the base (Fig. Such a result would occur if calcium enters through MT channels at the top of R2 and diffuses down into the cell apex and then diffuses back up R1. 4b) with a mean slope of 35.4 ± 1.3 pA per stereocilium at a holding potential of −80 mV. This slope represents the MT current per stereocilium and may be compared with the single-channel current inferred from measurements of unitary events which in apical inner hair cells has a mean amplitude of 15.0 ± 1.6 pA at −80 mV 12. A few measurements were made on outer hair cells which have thinner stereocilia (∼0.25 μm in diameter) than the inner hair cells. One possible reason for the smaller ratio compared to the inner hair cells is that during channel opening the calcium concentration in the stereocilia may be higher due to their smaller diameter and volume producing greater dye saturation. 