After blocking the cells with blocking solution (10% goat serum plus 1% immunoglobulin free bovine serum albumin in phosphate buffered saline), they were incubated with the primary antibody, rabbit anti-Caveolin-1 (dilution 1:250, BD Transduction Lab) at 37°C for 1 h and visualized with the secondary antibody, goat-anti rabbit IgG-Alexa Fluor 568 (dilution 1:400, Life Technologies). Cell nuclei were stained with NucBlue (Life Technologies). Images were captured using the Leica SP5 Confocal microscope with 63× objective. Images from 10 different fibroblasts from control subject and 13 from the patient were stitched and the cell perimeter measured on the montaged cell. All variants identified in this individual are described in Supplementary Table SI. Immunofluorescence staining of the fibroblasts with antibody to the caveolin-1, revealed significantly reduced fluorescence in the patient’s cells compared to the control subject’s cells (Fig. There is resemblance of the phenotype to Wiedemann–Rautenstrauch Syndrome (WRS) [Wiedemann 1992; Rautenstrauch et al , 1994], also known as neonatal progeroid syndrome, but the definition of this entity has become significantly blurred due to the many misdiagnoses and needs careful re-evaluation before the exact relationship with our patients becomes clear. Cao et al  [2008] reported heterozygous c.400delA, p.I134Lfs*5 mutation in a 55-year-old father and his 28-year-old daughter of Northern European origin with onset of lipodystrophy affecting the face and upper body at birth [Berger et al , 2002]. Besides these features they had neurologic abnormalities including severe ataxia and neuropathy. She also developed insulin resistance, acanthosis nigricans, hirsutism, diabetes mellitus, and hypertriglyceridemia during childhood and had marked hypoleptinemia and hypoadiponectinemia. Other distinctive clinical features included hypocalcemia and hypomagnesemia, which were attributed to vitamin D resistance. CAV1 is a major component of caveolae, which are specialized plasma membrane microdomains appearing as 50–100 nm vesicular invaginations [Stan 2005, Parton and Simons 2007], individually or in clusters, in adipocytes, endothelial cells, fibroblasts, and myocytes. The Cav1−/− mice also have reduced subcutaneous and intra-abdominal fat with underdeveloped perigonadal fat pads but not frank, generalized lipodystrophy [Razani et al , 2002]. It is likely that caveolin-1 has minimal role in the formation of caveolae in the fibroblasts. He was born full term at 39.5 weeks gestation with a birth weight of 2,930 g and a birth length 51 cm. His hair was thin and grew slowly but the nails grew normally. Currently, he has sunken cheeks, pinched nose, and excessive wrinkling of the face and marked, generalized loss of subcutaneous fat except from the abdomen and buttocks. A recent echocardiography was normal with pulmonary artery pressure in the normal range. Ultrasound examination in utero at 20 weeks gestation identified unilateral pleural effusion which resolved by 33 weeks gestation. She was small for gestational age and had pleural effusion at birth. She was taking lansoprazole and cyproheptadine.Examination revealed generalized loss of subcutaneous fat, thin mottled skin with cutis marmorata (Fig. She had normal subcutaneous fat on the gluteal region. Molecular diagnostic studies for Hutchinson–Gilford progeria syndrome including genotyping for LMNA and ZMPSTE24 were negative and microarray chromosomal analysis (1.8M probes by Quest) was normal. Exome SequencingOne out of six trios was processed by Ambry Genetics (∼30 × coverage of the Agilent Sure SelectXT Human All Exon 50 Mb target, 2 × 100 bp Illumina HiSeq sequencing) while the other five trios were processed by the University of Washington Center for Mendelian Genomics (UW–CMG). Current throughput is sufficient to complete a 3–4 multiplexed exomes per lane at high coverage (60–80 × mean coverage).Sequencing data processing involved: (i) base calling (Illumina RTA 1.13); (ii) demultiplexing and conversion into unaligned BAM files by lane and index sequence (Illumina Basecalls To Sam and Picard Extract Illumina Barcodes); (iii) alignment to the human reference (hg19/GRCh37) using BWA [Li and Durbin 2009]. Immunofluorescence StainingThe cells were seeded on sterile glass 35 mm MaTTek dishes. 