Distribution of Sirt1 mRNA in brainIn situ hybridization histochemistry (ISHH) analyses with antisense 35S-labeled RNA probes spanning Sirt1 exons 8 and 9 sequences were performed to determine the anatomical distribution of Sirt1 mRNA in the mouse brain. Also, we found that within the cerebral cortex, Sirt1 mRNA is expressed in virtually all structures with the piriform cortex displaying the highest levels of hybridization (Fig. However, the dorsal raphe nucleus (DR) in the midbrain and the nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS) and the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus (DMV) in the caudal hindbrain were found to display moderate levels of hybridization (Figs. We also found that Sirt1 mRNA is moderately to highly expressed in several circumventricular organs (CVOs) such as the organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis (OVLT) (Fig. Of note, these fasting-induced changes in the levels of acetylated K379 in p53 were brain-area-specific since no differences were detected in the rest of the forebrain between the fed and fasted states (Fig. It has been shown that fasting-dependent regulations of several genes known to govern body weight homeostasis are altered in obesity (Sanacora et al , 1990; Korner et al , 2000). It has been shown that fasting-dependent regulations of several genes known to govern body weight homeostasis are altered in obesity (Sanacora et al , 1990; Korner et al , 2000). The enzymatic activity of the mammalian Sir2 ortholog (SIRT1) is not limited to histones but includes also transcription factors and cofactors that govern different biological programs (Michan and Sinclair, 2007). Here, we performed in situ hybridization histochemistry (ISHH) analyses and found that Sirt1 mRNA is widely expressed throughout the mouse neuroaxis. Importantly, Sirt1 mRNA was abundantly expressed in metabolically-relevant areas as for example the hypothalamic arcuate (ARH), ventromedial (VMH), dorsomedial (DMH), paraventricular (PVH) nuclei and the area postrema (AP) and the nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS) in the hindbrain. Thus, ICC analysis may have been an ideal approach to determine the distribution of this sirtuin in the CNS. To date, very little is known regarding the anatomical distribution of this sirtuin throughout the neuroaxis. Moreover, the reliability of our assay is further supported by the fact that nuclei in which Sirt1 mRNA was readily detected by ISHH analysis were also found positive for the expression of this messenger RNA when independently tested by q-RTPCR (Fig. However, without direct experiments on samples from mice lacking SIRT1 in specific CNS sites we cannot conclude that the changes in p53 acetylation status we have observed are solely dependent on the activity of SIRT1. However, relatively little is known about whether SIRT1 is expressed in neurons. However, in mammals, the molecular players and cell types that mediate CR’s effects are still unknown. SIRT1 is increased in the brain of CR rodents (Cohen et al , 2004), but if these increases occur in all brain structures or are restricted to specific sites has not been established yet. Although we have not analyzed SIRT1 in brains of CR mice, our data in Fig. Because axonal degeneration precedes neuronal death in neurodegenerative states such as Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s disease, pharmacological activation of SIRT1 may represent a novel and potentially more effective approach in the fight against these pathological conditions. If this is true, then SIRT1 in these neurons may be part of CNS mechanisms that coordinate energy balance. Future studies on neuron-specific, Sirt1 gene knockout mice will be necessary to assess the physiological relevance of SIRT1 in these neurons on body energy homeostasis. Also, our data establish that these regulations are lost in a genetic model of obesity suggesting a novel potential role for brain SIRT1 in regulating energy balance. Also, our data establish that these regulations are lost in a genetic model of obesity suggesting a novel potential role for brain SIRT1 in regulating energy balance. Also, our data establish that these regulations are lost in a genetic model of obesity suggesting a novel potential role for brain SIRT1 in regulating energy balance. Mouse hypothalamic RNAs were extracted using Trizol Reagent (Invitrogen, Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). RT-PCR (One-Step RT-PCR Kit from Invitrogen) was performed using these RNAs as templates, and the following deoxy-oligonucleotides as primers: T3-SIRT1 5′ AATTAACCCTCACTAAAGGGAGActataccccatgaagtgcctc 3′ and T7-SIRT1 5′ TAATACGACTCACTATAGGGAGAgacaagacgtcatcttcagag 3′. Sense or antisense 35S-labeled RNA probes were generated by in vitro transcription with either T3 or T7 RNA polymerase, respectively. ISHH for Sirt1 (35S) mRNA was performed as described earlier (Elias et al , 1999). Then, sections were dehydrated in increasing concentrations of ethanol, cleared in xylenes for 15 minutes, rehydrated in decreasing concentrations of ethanol and placed in pre-warmed sodium citrate buffer (95–100ºC, pH 6). Films were developed and slices dipped in Kodak NTB autoradiographic emulsion, dried, and stored in desiccated, foil-wrapped boxes at 4ºC for 2–3 weeks. Another series was hybridized with T3-transcribed, sense 35S-labeled RNA probes as described above and used as negative control. Mice were deeply anesthetized and transcardially perfused with an artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF) solution ((in mM): 126 Sucrose, 21.4 NaHCO3, 2.5 KCl, 1.2 NaH2PO4, 1.2 MgCl2, 2.4 CaCl2, and 11 D-glucose). After reverse transcription, the cDNAs for SIRT1, POMC and GAPDH were amplified by PCR using the following primers (these pairs of primers are all designed across at least one intron allowing discrimination between genomic- and cDNA-specific amplicons. Fasted-mice were starved for 24 hours by removing only food (water was provided ad libitum) 2 hours before the onset of the dark cycle the day before they were sacrificed. Brains were stored −80ºC until ready to cryosection. Then, sections were dehydrated and stained as follows: 75% ethanol for 1 minute, DEPC water for 30 seconds, drip thionin onto slide for 30 seconds, DEPC water for 30 seconds, 75% ethanol for 1 minute, 95% ethanol for 1 minute, 100% ethanol for 1 minute, xylenes for 10 minutes and then air dry briefly until xylenes are evaporated. Fasted-mice were starved for 24 hours by removing only food (water was provided ad libitum) 2 hours before the onset of the dark cycle the day before they were sacrificed. Hypothalamus, forebrain (without hypothalamus) and hindbrain were dissected as described above. 