Thus, in addition to exhibiting activity related to memory guided saccades (as well as fixation), these two sample neurons also exhibited significant modulations based on the invisible movement goal during extrafoveal tracking. During the extrafoveal stimulation condition, the neuron exhibited an initial transient response immediately after trial onset (arrow in Figure 3C; for a higher resolution view of this response, see Supplementary Figure 1), consistent with its sensory response observed during memory guided saccades (Figure 3A). During the extrafoveal stimulation condition, the neuron exhibited an initial transient response immediately after trial onset (arrow in Figure 3C; for a higher resolution view of this response, see Supplementary Figure 1), consistent with its sensory response observed during memory guided saccades (Figure 3A). During the extrafoveal stimulation condition, the neuron exhibited an initial transient response immediately after trial onset (arrow in Figure 3C; for a higher resolution view of this response, see Supplementary Figure 1), consistent with its sensory response observed during memory guided saccades (Figure 3A). During the extrafoveal tracking condition (Figure 3E), the neuron again exhibited an initial transient response immediately after trial onset, but its firing rate during sustained tracking remained well below that seen before memory guided saccades. In fact, the neuron's average level of activity during sustained extrafoveal tracking (Figure 3E) appeared very similar to its average level of activity during passive viewing of the moving bars (Figure 3C), even though the bar inside the response field was used to guide tracking in one condition but could be ignored in the other.Qualitatively similar observations were made for the sample neuron in the right column of Figure 3 (B,D,F), with the exception that this second neuron did not exhibit a strong sensory response to stimulus onsets inside its response field (Figure 3B).Thus, for the two sample neurons of Figure 3 - both representing the location of the peripheral visual stimulus guiding extrafoveal tracking - there was no apparent selective increase in activity when the stimulus inside their response fields was actively used to guide the behavior as opposed to when it was passively viewed. Responses recalculated as a function of retinotopic stimulus or goal locationThe pattern of results observed during sustained extrafoveal tracking suggests that neurons in our population were modulated based on the location of the inferred movement goal rather than the retinotopic stimulus. The modulation of activity for these two neurons during extrafoveal tracking can thus be explained as a consequence of the inferred goal sweeping in and out of the neurons' response fields as the monkey was not quite perfect in following the stimulus.This “spatial tuning” for the goal was even more evident when we included the entire range of goal locations observed during extrafoveal tracking. This interpretation is also supported by studies investigating the role of the SC in representing the behavioral relevance of visual targets, regardless of the type of voluntary eye movement generated to follow these targets (Krauzlis & Dill, 2002; Carello & Krauzlis, 2004). This interpretation is also supported by studies investigating the role of the SC in representing the behavioral relevance of visual targets, regardless of the type of voluntary eye movement generated to follow these targets (Krauzlis & Dill, 2002; Carello & Krauzlis, 2004). This interpretation is also supported by studies investigating the role of the SC in representing the behavioral relevance of visual targets, regardless of the type of voluntary eye movement generated to follow these targets (Krauzlis & Dill, 2002; Carello & Krauzlis, 2004). Plotting the firing rate of each neuron as a function of each of these locations therefore produced a response field map for the neuron - but one that was derived from extrafoveal tracking data rather than from saccade data. As can be seen, each of these neurons had its own region of preferred retinotopic goal locations during extrafoveal tracking, and this region was similar to that predicted from the conventional response field mapping procedure using saccades - shown in Figure 5A and B (right column). On the other hand, only 11/55 (20%) of the more peripheral neurons having a stimulus inside their response fields were more active during extrafoveal tracking than during passive viewing of the stimulus (p<0.05, t-test).Figure 6 also highlights two additional aspects of our population responses that are noteworthy. This observation is documented in Figure 8, which summarizes the activity of either the peripheral or central neurons in our population during the first 200 ms of extrafoveal tracking trials - and excluding any activity for which the first catch-up saccade occurred with a latency shorter than 300 ms. We quantified the width of this distribution by obtaining a Gaussian function fit for the data (equation 2), and we found that the standard deviation of this fit - a measure of the spatial distribution - was ~3.25°. However, this activity was more restricted spatially, even though the analysis was done for a similar retinotopic goal location (0° as in the extrafoveal tracking analysis): the Gaussian function fit to this data had a standard deviation of ~2.9° (Figure 9B). Expressed in SC anatomical coordinates as in (Munoz & Wurtz, 1995b), this value translates into ~0.81 mm from the rostral pole of the SC, which is similar to earlier estimates with a similar behavioral task (see in particular Figure 7H and Figure 12 of Munoz & Wurtz, 1995b). When we plotted these values from the eye position data as a function of the standard deviations of the Gaussian functions fit to the spatial distribution of active SC neurons obtained above (Figure 9), we found a consistent relationship (Figure 10): as the width of the SC activity profile increased by ~0.5° across the three conditions, the variability in eye position around the behavioral goal increased by 0.4°-0.5°. Independence of extrafoveal tracking responses from visual stimulus presenceFinally, to show that the goal-related activity that we observed during extrafoveal tracking did not depend on the presence of a visual stimulus anywhere in the visual field, we also recorded SC activity during an “extrafoveal tracking blink” condition from one of our monkeys (Figure 12 - top schematics). Nine of them had peripheral response fields and had one of the peripheral bars - but not the movement goal - inside the response fields.Figure 12A shows average eye velocity traces and average neuronal responses in this condition for the 9 neurons having a visual stimulus inside their response fields. In a related study, we validate this prediction (Hafed et al , 2008). Besides exhibiting saccade-related and smooth-pursuit-related activity (Figures 2, 4, and 5; Supplementary Figure 4; Munoz & Wurtz, 1993a; Krauzlis et al , 2000), our rostral neurons were tuned for particular retinotopic regions (Figure 5 and Krauzlis et al , 2000), suggesting a continuous topographic representation even inside this so-called “zone”.A related principle of current gaze error models of the SC is that neurons in the “fixation zone” also encode gaze error in their absolute firing rates (Bergeron & Guitton, 2000; Choi & Guitton, 2006). Specifically, OPN's may use the projections that they receive from the SC in order to detect imbalances in SC activity, not whether or not the rostral SC is active. We found a spatial spread during fixation of a single stationary spot that was similar to that reported earlier for a similar behavior (Munoz & Wurtz, 1995b). Spatial accuracy was not enforced during the initial grace period in order to allow the monkeys enough time to initiate their tracking. Thus, during ongoing tracking, the visual features of the tracked stimulus were in the worst possible case (which was quite rare) at least 4° away from the monkeys' gaze (range: 4°-11°).“Extrafoveal stimulation” trials used an identical stimulus configuration for the peripheral bars, except that the central stationary spot remained on. We enforced spatial accuracy of fixation by aborting a trial whenever we detected an eye position that was more than 1° away from the central spot.We collected 35-50 trials for each motion starting phase, giving 70-100 trials per eye movement condition per experiment.The foveal tracking conditionFor 58% (68/117) of our neurons, we also ran “foveal tracking” trials that were identical to those of extrafoveal tracking, but in which the midpoint between the two bars was explicitly shown with a low contrast small spot. Visual and saccade-prelude response fields generally coincided spatially - and had similar widths - but we always used the saccadeprelude ones when making comparisons with our main behavioral tasks.Recording sites relative to stimulus and goal locationsWe tailored our extrafoveal tracking stimulus configuration depending on the spatial location and extent of the response field of each neuron. The parameters A, Bx, and By were chosen to be 3, 1.4, and 1.8, respectively (Quaia et al , 1998). Thus, the aim of this analysis was to avoid - as much as possible - the confound presented by the fact that the spatial accuracy and precision of eye movements varied across the different conditions depending on the certainty of the tracked or fixated goal location (see, for example, Figure 10).To quantify the spatial distribution of the activity obtained with this analysis, we fit the data with Gaussian functions having a spread parameter (standard deviation) that described the spatial extent of activity in each condition:eqation 2y=α+βexp(−E2∕2σ2)where E is the neurons' preferred eccentricity, y is the average firing rate of neurons at this eccentricity, β is a scaling parameter, and σ and α describe the spatial spread and asymptote of firing rate, respectively.We also applied this analysis to the firing rates during fixation of a stationary spot with no other peripheral visual stimuli on the display. Behavioral performance summary for the extrafoveal tracking taskWe characterized our monkeys' extrafoveal tracking performance by computing smooth pursuit gain and phase lag for each session. Behavioral performance summary for the extrafoveal tracking taskWe characterized our monkeys' extrafoveal tracking performance by computing smooth pursuit gain and phase lag for each session. Smooth pursuit gain across sessions was 0.75 +/- 0.01 s.e.m., and the average smooth pursuit phase lag was 0.3 ms +/- 0.9 ms s.e.m. Supplementary Movie 1 illustrates a sample trial from the extrafoveal tracking task. Supplementary Movie 1 illustrates a sample trial from the extrafoveal tracking task. Supplementary Movie 1 illustrates a sample trial from the extrafoveal tracking task. Supplementary Movie 1 illustrates a sample trial from the extrafoveal tracking task. Summary of recording sites and stimulus configurations for extrafoveal trackingFigure 1B summarizes the recording sites of our 117 eye-movement-related neurons (left panel) as well as the initial retinotopic locations of the peripheral bars used during extrafoveal tracking (right panel). 