Never, Sometimes, or Often.” Responses across the two scales were standardized on a scale of 0–1 so that each item contributes equally to a given scale. Families’ income-to-needs ratio (INR), calculated as the ratio of family income relative to the federal income standard, normed for family size where a ratio of 1 reflects the cutoff for living in poverty, was collected at each wave of data collection. Neighborhood poverty was calculated using data obtained from the 2012–2016 American Community Survey 5-year estimate and defined as the percent of all individuals living at or below the federal poverty line within youths’ wave 6 residential census tracts (U.S. Census Bureau, 2018). Given high correlations between predictors, each CVE spatial dynamic measure was analyzed separately with the exception of the pervasiveness models which tested for additive and interactive effects of home- and school-based CVE. Specifically, long-term chronicity significantly, positively predicted behavioral dysregulation (B = 0.07, SE = .02, p < .01, see Model 1). Three distinct spatial dynamics of CVE are explored to test in what ways home and school neighborhood-based CVE matters for youths’ psychological functioning, including to what extent CVE is chronic (e.g., repeated exposure across time and space), pervasive (e.g., experienced in multiple neighborhood contexts), and spatially proximate (e.g., closeness to youths’ home or school). Direct violent victimization consistently, positively predicted all three outcomes with only slight variation in the predictive power of each parameter (Tables 4 and 5), such that higher levels of DVV were related to higher anxiety, behavioral dysregulation, and cognitive dysregulation. As one of the first studies to precisely measure and compare CVE spatial dynamics in terms of chronicity, pervasiveness, and spatial proximity, this study makes major contributions to our understanding of the relationship between CVE and adolescent psychological functioning. Moreover, while behavioral dysregulation was robustly related to CVE, cognitive dysregulation was not highlighting how self-regulatory abilities may be context-dependent. While most community violence research only measures violence occurring in the home or does not probe for specific neighborhood context, this study successfully delineated and compared CVE in home and school neighborhoods. Practitioners working with youth who reside in high-crime communities should be aware that even if youth were not directly exposed to violence, they may be in need of mental health supports. Practitioners working with youth who reside in high-crime communities should be aware that even if youth were not directly exposed to violence, they may be in need of mental health supports. Practitioners working with youth who reside in high-crime communities should be aware that even if youth were not directly exposed to violence, they may be in need of mental health supports. Research indicates that this program may potentially reduce crime (Curran, 2018; McMillen et al , 2019); therefore, the results of this study suggest that such programs may subsequently improve the mental health of youth who traverse these neighborhoods. Another meta-analysis by McDonald and Richmond (2008) examined 26 studies focusing on CVE in urban communities and found robust relationships with PTSD and aggressive symptoms among youth.Most studies on CVE and youths’ psychological functioning to date have operationalized CVE using subjective measures, asking youth to report whether they have witnessed, heard about, or been directly exposed to violence. This perspective postulates that the three spatial dynamics of CVE (chronicity, pervasiveness, and spatial proximity) may be unique in how they affect individuals and communities (McCoy, 2013).Firstly, CVE may vary in chronicity, or the repeated experience of CVE across specific periods of time (i.e., lifetime vs. 1 year) in space (where it occurs). Proximity of CVE is often conceptualized by levels of personal victimization, which vary from direct victimization (i.e., most proximal exposure), to witnessing and to simply “knowing about” or “hearing about” violence (i.e., most distal exposure). By comparing precise measures of CVE, this study tests which measures are most predictive across different domains of psychological functioning.This study poses the question of, how do varying timeframes of chronicity, additive and interactive contexts of exposure, and ranges of spatial proximity relate to youths’ psychological functioning? Two cohorts of children (N = 602, 53.3% female) and caregivers were recruited from Head Start Centers located in seven of Chicago’s most disadvantaged neighborhoods. Children and families were assessed when children were in preschool (Wave 1, N = 602), kindergarten (Wave 2, N = 398), third (Wave 3, N = 505), fifth (Wave 4, N = 491), ninth/tenth (Wave 5, N = 469), and tenth/eleventh (Wave 6, N = 437) grades. MeasuresCommunity Violence ExposureCrime statistics were obtained from the Chicago Data Portal (Chicago Data Portal, 2019a, 2019b). MeasuresCommunity Violence ExposureCrime statistics were obtained from the Chicago Data Portal (Chicago Data Portal, 2019a, 2019b). These data were mapped and geocoded onto youth’s wave 6 home and school addresses using ArcGIS version 10.4.1 (Environmental Systems Research Institute, Inc. [Esri], Redlands, CA, USA). The count of all geocoded violent crime in each spatial boundary was divided by the number of days during that time frame to capture the temporal elements of each CVE measure.In order to delineate the individual influence of home- and school-based CVE relative to their combined influence, spatial dynamic measures were calculated at the level of the school, the level of the home, and the combination of the two. When home- and school-based measures were combined, there was a small percentage of duplicates, in which the same crime was counted as occurring twice because it fell within both the home and school spatial boundaries. Long-term chronicity was calculated by taking total violent crime in the home and school two-block boundaries and dividing that by 365 days, exactly 1 year prior to the assessment date at wave 6. Home-based CVE was calculated by taking the frequency of all violent crime in the previous year at the home two-block spatial boundary, 1 year prior to assessment at wave 6, whereas school-based CVE measures the 1-year frequency of violent crime within the school two-block boundary. A growing body of literature has linked CVE to the presence of psychological dysfunction (Fowler, Tompsett, Jacques-Tiura, & Baltes, 2009; McDonald & Richmond, 2008), but research has yet to delineate spatial and temporal elements of CVE. Youth responded to 20 items that tapped stable, general levels of anxiety (α = .72). An example item states, “I worry about making mistakes… hardly ever, sometimes, or often.” Responses were scored on a Likert scale from 1 to 3. 