In the past, Theiler and others had carried out drenching experiments, in which animals were force-fed plants suspected of being toxic. Toxicologists managed to isolate the toxic principle of various poisonous plants whilst physiologists looked at the anatomical effects of toxicosis. The bacteriologist, David Bruce, had proved a link between nagana, game and tsetse flies in the 1890s (discussed below), but a decline in incidence after the rinderpest epizootic (1896–7), which killed many cattle and faunal carriers, stalled further investigations for over twenty years. During the Second World War, South African virologists provided horsesickness vaccines for the British army fighting in Egypt and the Middle East and were instrumental in promoting the anti-rinderpest inoculation campaign in Tanganyika, successfully preventing the southward spread of this cattle epizootic. In the case of nagana, however, incidence was due to environmental factors rather than direct contagion, and for the next three decades, the immediate catalyst for particular research initiatives was always the plight of white farmers. Of particular significance was Raymond Alexander’s invention of an inoculation against horsesickness in 1934. Of particular significance was Raymond Alexander’s invention of an inoculation against horsesickness in 1934. But this was not always the case and Africans were not necessarily excluded from access to biomedical advances. In the Transkei this provoked localised unrest in 1914, and Africans, not only in the Eastern Cape, remained divided over the issue. In the Transkei this provoked localised unrest in 1914, and Africans, not only in the Eastern Cape, remained divided over the issue. In 1923, for instance, some magistrates in Zululand reported that many people believed dipping had saved animals in a region subject to both East Coast fever and redwater. Disease control facilitated overstocking and thus overgrazing, thereby giving rise to erosion and the propagation of more resilient, but often less nutritious and potentially more toxic, wild plants. Optimising livestock yields was predicated not just upon biomedicine but also upon a more ecologically conscious approach to veld management. Veterinary science alone could not achieve that end. Veterinary science alone could not achieve that end. Continued links with the metropole ensured the flow of European (as opposed to simply British) science to the southern hemisphere. In 1920 the government established Africa’s first veterinary faculty, affiliated to the University of Pretoria. In 1920 the government established Africa’s first veterinary faculty, affiliated to the University of Pretoria. Hermann Mönnig compiled South Africa’s first book on helminthology in 1934, whilst Douw Steyn’s work on poisonous plants remained the principal point of reference for toxicology until the 1980s.45 Hermann Mönnig compiled South Africa’s first book on helminthology in 1934, whilst Douw Steyn’s work on poisonous plants remained the principal point of reference for toxicology until the 1980s.45 Hermann Mönnig compiled South Africa’s first book on helminthology in 1934, whilst Douw Steyn’s work on poisonous plants remained the principal point of reference for toxicology until the 1980s.45 Literate and enterprising farmers, in turn, used this knowledge to devise their own practical means of combating these pests. In the first decade of the twentieth century, Joseph Baynes from Nels Rust in Natal, worked with the bacteriologist, Herbert Watkins-Pitchford, and put Lounsbury’s analysis of the lifecycle of the brown tick to practical use by producing a three-day arsenical dip to cleanse his stock. Veterinarians later introduced this method to East Coast fever areas.50 The expansion of veterinary knowledge and the refinement of methods of disease control therefore involved a two-way interaction between scientists and farmers. Each animal species, whether wild or domestic, engaged in different grazing habits that were now analysed within the remit of the ecological language of vegetation succession and climax. Philip Viljoen, amongst others, invoked the language of a ‘balance of nature’ and suggested that it was essential to restore or create a ‘natural’ equilibrium through sophisticated grazing practices, based on a careful assessment of the carrying capacity of the land. Viljoen also emphasised the importance of indigenous, as opposed to exotic, grasses, along with the need to cultivate fodder.63 The indigenisation of grassland research reflected a dramatic shift from the acclimatisation experiments using alien flora that had characterised both veld and forest policies in the early twentieth century. Some colonial veterinarians had consulted Theiler and others prior to the founding of Onderstepoort, but, from the 1920s onwards, this rapprochement became far more commonplace and it was South African nationals, as opposed to foreign-trained scientists, who provided this expertise. Some colonial veterinarians had consulted Theiler and others prior to the founding of Onderstepoort, but, from the 1920s onwards, this rapprochement became far more commonplace and it was South African nationals, as opposed to foreign-trained scientists, who provided this expertise. The Institute was born out of an imperial and South African material ideal of agricultural progress. The Institute was born out of an imperial and South African material ideal of agricultural progress. The Institute was born out of an imperial and South African material ideal of agricultural progress. The Institute was born out of an imperial and South African material ideal of agricultural progress. The Institute was born out of an imperial and South African material ideal of agricultural progress. Theiler discovered East Coast fever was not redwater but a disease caused by a different protozoan (single cell organism) that came to be known as Theileria parva. Theiler discovered East Coast fever was not redwater but a disease caused by a different protozoan (single cell organism) that came to be known as Theileria parva. Theiler discovered East Coast fever was not redwater but a disease caused by a different protozoan (single cell organism) that came to be known as Theileria parva. Theiler discovered East Coast fever was not redwater but a disease caused by a different protozoan (single cell organism) that came to be known as Theileria parva. Theiler discovered East Coast fever was not redwater but a disease caused by a different protozoan (single cell organism) that came to be known as Theileria parva. Scientists attributed the growing danger of toxicosis to overstocking, which biomedical advances had helped to promote. Africans in particular made an important contribution to the identification of toxic plants as well as to the aetiology and control of nagana. Comparative success in tackling a number of dangerous stock diseases boosted institutional self-confidence and encouraged South African scientists to intervene in disease control campaigns beyond South Africa’s borders. Second only to gold mining, rural products generated the largest amount of export revenue, with wool constituting the prime pastoral commodity throughout the first half of the twentieth century. The article also traces the development of veterinary research and analyses the scientific and economic reasons behind specific shifts in investigative priorities. The article also traces the development of veterinary research and analyses the scientific and economic reasons behind specific shifts in investigative priorities. Defending the efforts of his team, du Toit bluntly stated: The governor, Alfred Milner, who oversaw the early years of reconstruction, was determined to make the Transvaal a prosperous colony by promoting gold mining on the Witwatersrand, as well increasing agricultural production, primarily by white, and preferably British, settler farmers. Milner believed in the imperial ideal that the Empire should pay for itself. Improving the livestock economy in order to provide cheap food for the Rand as well as the cities was integral to this policy. Self-consciously progressive white commercial farmers were politically influential and, through organisations such as the Agricultural Union, they collectively put pressure on the state to finance research that would overcome environmental barriers to improved production.10 The Department of Agriculture sponsored a variety of research programmes that looked into such issues as the development of dryland farming, the cultivation of better varieties of seeds and grasses, as well as the elimination of injurious crop pests. Nonetheless, the Veterinary Department received the largest share of state grants, which reflected not only the economic importance attributed to the livestock industry but also the high cost involved in developing this branch of science. In defending the €90,000 spent on the Onderstepoort Veterinary Institute by the late 1920s du Toit was also reflecting upon the expanding nature of veterinary research, which was to continue throughout the first half of the twentieth century. Theiler chose this location because of its proximity to the capital, its large acreage and its good rail networks. Environment played a role too: Onderstepoort lay in the heart of the Transvaal bushveld where horsesickness was rife and poisonous plants plentiful. Environment played a role too: Onderstepoort lay in the heart of the Transvaal bushveld where horsesickness was rife and poisonous plants plentiful. Environment played a role too: Onderstepoort lay in the heart of the Transvaal bushveld where horsesickness was rife and poisonous plants plentiful. Environment played a role too: Onderstepoort lay in the heart of the Transvaal bushveld where horsesickness was rife and poisonous plants plentiful. Environment played a role too: Onderstepoort lay in the heart of the Transvaal bushveld where horsesickness was rife and poisonous plants plentiful. These developments illustrated more than just growing scientific complexities. These developments illustrated more than just growing scientific complexities. Field experiments at Armoedsvlakte Farm, near Vryburg, dominated research in the 1910s and revealed that lamsiekte was a form of botulism, acquired by gnawing carrion scattered around the veld. Cattle chewed the bones because of a condition known as pica, caused by a phosphorous deficiency in the soil and hence in the vegetation.19 For Petrus du Toit his profession went beyond curing or preventing disease: 