In this paper, we present the engineering aspects of a general methodology tailored to spatiotemporally control mechanical forces inside bioreactors. Oj denotes a measurement (observed value), whereas Tj denotes the corresponding desired measurement (target value). By measurement, we refer to a mean shear rate value associated with one of the scaffold regions.The initial MLP output does not yield the most accurate solution. The search algorithm aims to find a solution that is better than the one provided by the MLP, by following a number of rules to introduce changes to the MLP output as shown in the pseudocode below (see Algorithm 1). 5(d)-(f) and 6 (details in the Section III), any inaccuracies produced by the approximation can be compensated for in the second phase where simulations are replaced with real NMR measurements. At the inlets, we set U = Uin according to the input speed determined by the algorithm. F.NMR Shear Rate MeasurementThe pulse sequence for the NMR imaging experiment is shown in Fig. gradients was modified to include phase-contrast velocimetry as in [19] and [20]. gradient with the same magnitude. In this study, velocity measurements represent velocities averaged along the z-direction. In this study, velocity measurements represent velocities averaged along the z-direction. 5(d) shows a uniform pattern. 5(c)] demonstrates that the algorithm converged to a reasonable solution in less than 25 iterations, and found an accurate solution in less than 50 iterations. At that point, the target shear rate value was changed to 11 s−1 and the convergence speed to the new value was assessed. At that point, the target shear rate value was changed to 11 s−1 and the convergence speed to the new value was assessed. At that point, the target shear rate value was changed to 11 s−1 and the convergence speed to the new value was assessed. 5(e)], where only a small number of iterations were required to find a new solution. Shear rate values in the scaffold varied between 10 s−1 and 12 s−1, when the target value selected was 11 s−1. The results confirm the algorithm’s excellent adaptive abilities. These results also validate the use of a simplified CFD model in the training phase, in order to reduce computational cost and training time. Growth media flowing into the bioreactor was warmed to 37 °C and sparged with a 5% CO2 gas mixture. This flow pattern was also used with the cellulose scaffold [see Fig. Bioreactors with multiple inlets, such as the one presented herein, reduce the need for engineering the scaffold material properties, and may alleviate manufacturing complexity while enabling the creation of more accurate and complex flow fields. The algorithm demonstrates high efficiency, as it converges to a solution with a small number of iterations. Furthermore, it can learn complex input/output relationships between inlet flow speeds and mechanical force distributions, which gives it the ability to quickly adapt to changes. Inlets are distributed around a chamber that holds a 3-mm-thick scaffold. 1(a) and (b) show the CAD drawings of the bioreactor design. NMR imaging probe. Porosity was determined by measuring the water volume absorbed by the scaffold, and dividing it by the total volume of the wet scaffold. The weight of the empty chamber with the dry scaffold was measured using a precision balance. The weight of the empty chamber with the dry scaffold was measured using a precision balance. The weight of the empty chamber with the dry scaffold was measured using a precision balance. The weight of the empty chamber with the dry scaffold was measured using a precision balance. The volume of the hydrated scaffold is the same as the chamber volume, which is easily calculated from the known inner chamber dimensions. The volume of the hydrated scaffold is the same as the chamber volume, which is easily calculated from the known inner chamber dimensions. Scaffold thickness and diameter were measured with WorkZone Digital Caliper with a range of 0–200 mm. Scaffold thickness and diameter were measured with WorkZone Digital Caliper with a range of 0–200 mm. Scaffolds were held in place by two large pore-density filters. The state of the art approach involves creating materials with local porosity gradients [8], [9], [12]-[17]. The state of the art approach involves creating materials with local porosity gradients [8], [9], [12]-[17]. Pressure was measured using Omega DPG8000 pressure gauges. Using this information, fluid permeability was determined from Darcy’s law Using this information, fluid permeability was determined from Darcy’s law C.Adaptive Control AlgorithmMachine learning methods including artificial neural networks are now commonly used to solve a variety of problems in cell biology [22], [23]. Mean values from different regions of the map are fed to an MLP as its input, and the output produced by the MLP is used to determine the flow speeds of all ten inlets required to reproduce the desired target map as closely as possible. A new shear rate map corresponding to the inlets’ flow speeds generated by the MLP with D inputs is obtained (Oj) and compared to the desired target (Tj) pattern using the cost function ξ1 of To prevent the search algorithm from biasing toward relatively large target vector components, a normalization is performed by dividing by the target vector, as shown in (2).For example, a target shear rate map can have high variations in shear rate values between different regions. 