To do this, we downsampled our dasatinib and nilotinib simulations to reflect the size of the respective frontline trial. We repeated this for 103 simulations, each time constructing a receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve to quantify the accuracy of the binary classifier against the real-world clinical data. This improvement is consistent across imatinib, dasatinib, and nilotinib and underscores the importance of substitution likelihood in these models. This improvement is consistent across imatinib, dasatinib, and nilotinib and underscores the importance of substitution likelihood in these models. Evolution-Guided Drug Design Could Inform Principled Decisions between Mutational Vulnerabilities during Drug DevelopmentTo further investigate how an evolutionarily informed approach to drug design might affect the clinical prevalence of resistance, we conceived of a hypothetical BCR-ABL TKI, which we call maxitinib, designed with mutational liabilities in mind. At the same time, maxitinib K15, which targets the five least likely mutants, offers virtually no advantage over imatinib. In the model, a tumor grows (until 109–1012 cells, modeling a range of dissemination), at which point most of the tumor is excised and the remaining population (105–108 cells, modeling completeness of excision) is treated with an inhibitor. Some characteristics of the available clinical data complicate the analysis. This ambiguity gives rise to a less pure, and likely more conservative, dataset, because our meta-analysis likely includes some patients with advanced metastatic disease. This suggests that evolutionary forces beyond degree of resistance may shape the distribution of resistance alleles. This suggests that evolutionary forces beyond degree of resistance may shape the distribution of resistance alleles. Specifically, the statistical test was developed to detect a simple case of mutation bias: transition-transversion bias. That is, the dataset is simulated to reflect the expected outcome when variation in mutation frequency is decoupled from mutation bias. That is, the dataset is simulated to reflect the expected outcome when variation in mutation frequency is decoupled from mutation bias. That is, the dataset is simulated to reflect the expected outcome when variation in mutation frequency is decoupled from mutation bias. Even so, we wanted to confirm that our rejection of the null hypothesis was not an artifact of a large, aggregated dataset. The aggregated NSCLC data are not significant on their own (p = 0.45). The aggregated NSCLC data are not significant on their own (p = 0.45). The aggregated NSCLC data are not significant on their own (p = 0.45). Such cases represent indications for which next-generation drug design could be informed by analysis of mutation biases and substitution likelihood. To be clear, it is inaccurate to say that drug selection is unimportant. Recent studies have shown the power of multi-scale modeling in forecasting the evolutionary trajectories of influenza evolving immune escape (Łuksza and Lässig, 2014) and predicting fitness landscapes of bacteria evolving resistance against trimethoprim (Rodrigues et al , 2016). Recent studies have shown the power of multi-scale modeling in forecasting the evolutionary trajectories of influenza evolving immune escape (Łuksza and Lässig, 2014) and predicting fitness landscapes of bacteria evolving resistance against trimethoprim (Rodrigues et al , 2016). Our work builds on these findings by predicting epidemiology-scale resistance from molecular insights. Our work builds on these findings by predicting epidemiology-scale resistance from molecular insights. The basic concept of evolutionarily informed treatment regimens that minimize drug resistance is not new. The basic concept of evolutionarily informed treatment regimens that minimize drug resistance is not new. In all cases, we believe that rational drug design may be synonymous with evolutionarily informed drug design. In all cases, we believe that rational drug design may be synonymous with evolutionarily informed drug design. The Sanger Wellcome Trust download was as of 12-01-2017. The Sanger Wellcome Trust download was as of 12-01-2017. Mutation counts for each disease are found in Data S4. METHOD DETAILSConstruct GenerationFollowing recombination-based cloning into pLVX-IRES-Puro, site directed mutagenesis was utilized to make the correct mutation in BCR-ABL. METHOD DETAILSConstruct GenerationFollowing recombination-based cloning into pLVX-IRES-Puro, site directed mutagenesis was utilized to make the correct mutation in BCR-ABL. METHOD DETAILSConstruct GenerationFollowing recombination-based cloning into pLVX-IRES-Puro, site directed mutagenesis was utilized to make the correct mutation in BCR-ABL. METHOD DETAILSConstruct GenerationFollowing recombination-based cloning into pLVX-IRES-Puro, site directed mutagenesis was utilized to make the correct mutation in BCR-ABL. Viral supernatant was collected at 24 hours (Gozgit et al , 2018). All engineered cell lines were sequenced in the BCR-ABL kinase domain to confirm their identity.IC50 MeasurementsEleven serial dilutions were performed. Structure-based drug design is the industry standard to create potent second-generation inhibitors and has succeeded in ABL1+ leukemias (O’Hare et al , 2009; Wylie et al , 2017), c-KIT/PDGFR-mutated gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) (Evans et al , 2017), ALK/EGFR+lung cancers (Butterworth et al , 2017; Zhang et al , 2016), RET mutants/fusions (Subbiah et al , 2018), and TRK fusions (Menichincheri et al , 2016). From these probabilities we derive an asymptotic solution for the probability that either allele is dominant upon relapse. From these probabilities we derive an asymptotic solution for the probability that either allele is dominant upon relapse. Specifically, we expanded the clinically-parameterized model in Fassoni et al  (2018) to include the 19 resistance mutants analyzed in this study. Specifically, we expanded the clinically-parameterized model in Fassoni et al  (2018) to include the 19 resistance mutants analyzed in this study. Upon relapse (defined as disease progression to initial detection size), the dominant allele upon relapse is tallied. This system was simulated stochastically for a range of Mpre and Mpost values, and for each combination 50,000 virtual patients were analyzed using MATLAB. Using evolutionary theory to prospectively identify the residues and abundances that contribute to resistance following real-world drug use will improve pharmaceutical design (Hauser et al , 2018). For more information, see the Figure 3 legend. For drug-free growth rate experiments, N = 11-14 biological replicates were used due to the high fitness variability for low-titer infections. For more information, see the Figure 1 legend.CML Epidemiological AnalysisNegative binomial regression was used to construct models for resistance count data. For more information, see the Figure 1 legend.CML Epidemiological AnalysisNegative binomial regression was used to construct models for resistance count data. For more information, see the Figure 1 legend.CML Epidemiological AnalysisNegative binomial regression was used to construct models for resistance count data. Under the null model, these variants were randomly reassigned mutation classes and the sum of all counts for each mutation class was noted. An empirical p value was obtained as p = r/n, where n is the number of simulations and r is the number of simulations with a Mahalanobis distance greater than or equal to that of the observed data. Code was written in R markdown. Code used to execute the CML stochastic simulations can be found at https://github.com/pritchardlabatpsu/PredictiveResistanceEvolution/tree/master/Figures/Figure4. Code used to execute the CML stochastic simulations can be found at https://github.com/pritchardlabatpsu/PredictiveResistanceEvolution/tree/master/Figures/Figure4. Code used to execute the CML stochastic simulations can be found at https://github.com/pritchardlabatpsu/PredictiveResistanceEvolution/tree/master/Figures/Figure4. Code used to execute the CML stochastic simulations can be found at https://github.com/pritchardlabatpsu/PredictiveResistanceEvolution/tree/master/Figures/Figure4. Code used to execute the CML stochastic simulations can be found at https://github.com/pritchardlabatpsu/PredictiveResistanceEvolution/tree/master/Figures/Figure4. E255 forms a salt bridge interaction with K247, stabilizing the phosphate binding loop (P loop) that clamps over the ATP competitive inhibitor in the active site of the molecule (Figure 1B). E255 forms a salt bridge interaction with K247, stabilizing the phosphate binding loop (P loop) that clamps over the ATP competitive inhibitor in the active site of the molecule (Figure 1B). Importantly, this difference in phenotype occurs at clinically relevant concentrations of imatinib, which has a Cmax of 5.3 μM and a Ctrough of 2.4 μM at steady state (Peng et al , 2004). Because the less drug-resistant variant appeared in the clinic more often, we examined the relative growth rate of E255V and E255K in the absence of drug. However, the relative growth rates for E255V, E255K, and wild-type BCR-ABL cells were statistically indistinguishable (growth rate ± 95% confidence interval [CI] of 0.98 ± 0.075, 1.03 ± 0.125, and 0.96 ± 0.075, respectively; Figure 1E), despite having 80% power to detect a 10% growth rate difference. We include drug-free growth rates for all mutants as a potential explanatory variable during model selection in Figure 3.Thus, we hypothesized that a mutation from E > K might be more likely to occur than a mutation from E > V. Examining the genetic code, E > K requires a transition from G > A, whereas E > V requires a transversion from A > T. No other single-nucleotide substitutions can cause these two mutations. From this model, we derived an asymptotic solution for the probability that either allele drives relapse. From this model, we derived an asymptotic solution for the probability that either allele drives relapse. 268 high-confidence clinical cases of imatinib resistance were identified in these studies. We posit that an important step forward involves using decades of improvements in evolutionary theory (Coldman and Goldie, 1983, 1986; Goldie and Coldman, 1979, 1984; Iwasa et al , 2006; Komarova, 2006; Lässig et al , 2017; Lind et al , 2019; Lobkovsky and Koonin, 2012; Lukačišinová and Bollenbach, 2017; Łuksza and Lässig, 2014) and population genetics (Gerrish and Lenski, 1998; LeClerc et al , 1996; Stoltzfus and McCandlish, 2017) to create additional design principles for drug discovery informed by evolution. Thus, the literature presents us with an opportunity to estimate how genetic context and experimental conditions might affect drug response. This might suggest that the genetic drift in cell lines in an individual lab can influence drug potency and is consistent with recent findings (Ben-David et al , 2018). We identified the best N-variable model by leave-one-out-cross-validation (LOOCV). In addition, we considered the possibility that a fraction of the observations in our meta-analysis were included in the Sanger dataset. In addition, we considered the possibility that a fraction of the observations in our meta-analysis were included in the Sanger dataset. In addition, we considered the possibility that a fraction of the observations in our meta-analysis were included in the Sanger dataset. In addition, we considered the possibility that a fraction of the observations in our meta-analysis were included in the Sanger dataset. 