2A).10,11 The coin cell battery must be recharged after 19 hours of use, with approximately 30 minutes required for each charging cycle, and can sustain 100 recharging cycles (about 3 months of operation). 1) were pinned into the gastric mucosa at the distal body with an endoscopic rat tooth forceps (Olympus America) and secured by endoclip (Resolution clip, Boston Scientific, Natick, MA) (Fig. Attachment of electrogastrogram recording leadsA temporary transvenous cardiac pacing lead (model 6414-200 cm, Medtronic Inc., Minneapolis, MN), inserted through the endoscopic channel, was then screwed into the mucosa by applying torque on a lead wire situated within an outer sheath (Fig. The second reading was recorded with the stimulator turned ON for 30 minutes (Stimulation). A data acquisition system (DAQ USB 6210, National Instruments, Austin, TX), which interfaced between the stimulator electrode wires and the computer, was used to measure voltage outputs. A data acquisition system (DAQ USB 6210, National Instruments, Austin, TX), which interfaced between the stimulator electrode wires and the computer, was used to measure voltage outputs. The FAR during stimulation was 25.955 bpm/mV but increased to 42.657 bpm/mV when the stimulation was turned OFF and the second baseline reading was recorded. 5B) and was well secured by the use of endoclips, wire electrodes pinned into the mucosa, and “ears” clipped into place. The cardiac (EGG) lead was placed in the proximal aspect of the gastric body, close to the cardia. We were able to modulate the myoelectric activities of the porcine stomach with this endoscopically implanted stimulator. A significantly longer delay between measurements is suggested for obtaining more accurate EGG recordings, independently of prior stimulation effects. In the Baseline-2 recording, a significant increase in FAR (by 16.702 bpm/mV) was noted, as compared with the FAR during stimulation. Future systems will deliver different pulses to stomach tissues according to the severity of the gastric anomaly. Wireless GES deviceOur prototype wirelessly rechargeable stimulator measures 35 mm × 10 mm × 8 mm (Fig. 