Pharmacy information was also This method is a coding criterion based on ICD diagnosis This method is a coding criterion based on ICD diagnosis Patients were categorized into uncomplicated (stage 1) or complicated BPH (stage 2 or more) based on ICD codes during the first year of minimally invasive therapy using Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) codes Statistical AnalysisUnivariate and multivariate Cox proportional hazards regression analysis 5ARIs are among the most commonly used pharmacological treatments for BPH, more.. 8% of the patients presented with hematuria and 3.3% with bladder stones. stone, and type of 5ARIs, Multivariate Cox proportional hazard regression analysis finasteride use (HR = 1.42, 95% CI: 1.01 to 1.98, p = 0.044) were significant risk finasteride use (HR = 1.42, 95% CI: 1.01 to 1.98, p = 0.044) were significant risk inhibiting the enzyme 5α-reductase, thus promoting prostatic apoptosis, longitudinal claims data are warranted. reducing prostate size and improving urinary symptoms. patients of bladder outlet obstruction. have demonstrated that 5ARIs have the potential for long-term reduction in prostate findings from clinical trials cannot be generalized to men outside the in a real-world setting may exhibit lower adherence to the prescribed course of instead of discontinuation, which is supported by the International Society for We also found several factors that could influence the probability of our multivariable analysis, once the presence of hematuria and/or bladder stones was included, the information gained from BPH stage was no longer statistically intervention compared to dutasteride. outcomes between the two treatments14. These inconsistent results may be due to the longer follow-up multiple clinical trials showed 5ARIs could reduce the risk of AUR or the need for would be useful to link prostate size or PSA levels to each individual as variations and long-term clinical outcomes has not been determined. and long-term clinical outcomes has not been determined. record medication dispenses, which can be a reliable source to evaluate medication adherence and indicate medication-refill behavior among patients with chronic and older and aligned to Partners Healthcare within the NextGen Accountable Care one of the largest health care networks in North America including hospitals, dutasteride) with claims that contain the following diagnosis codes: 600.0 to Patients with more than one dispensation of 5ARIs for a Patients who received 5ARIs before July 2012 were excluded to ensure We evaluated automated pharmacy records for the twelve months the time in the first year of 5ARIs treatment. 