Regulation of immune cell signaling with kinase inhibitors Although inhibitors of protein kinases have been developed largely for neoplastic disorders in recent years, the first drug of this class (rapamycin) initially obtained FDA approval for use as an immunosuppressant following organ transplantation. The importance of the IL-10 pathway in IBD is evidenced by disease-associated polymorphisms near IL10 and its receptor (IL10RA), as well as near genes that control its production, such as PTGER4 (which encodes the EP4 prostanoid receptor) and the transcriptional co-activator CRTC3 [20]. The importance of the IL-10 pathway in IBD is evidenced by disease-associated polymorphisms near IL10 and its receptor (IL10RA), as well as near genes that control its production, such as PTGER4 (which encodes the EP4 prostanoid receptor) and the transcriptional co-activator CRTC3 [20]. Novel polymorphisms in leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2, a gene previously linked to Parkinson’s disease) confer increased risk of IBD [25]. Functional studies suggest that LRRK2 regulates production of reactive oxygen species and inflammatory cytokines by macrophages [26,27]. Mechanism-of-action studies have implicated the phoshatidylinositol kinase PIKfyve as the target of the clinical candidate apilimod, an inhibitor of IL-12/23 production discovered through phenotypic screening [31,32]. Genomic studies correlating transcription factor binding and histone modifications with gene expression have identified super-enhancers and other chromatin features that regulate immune cell function [33-35]. These insights, coupled with new tools for targeting transcription factors and chromatin-modifying proteins (Table 1), suggest that small-molecule modulators of transcription will be useful for therapeutic manipulation of cytokine networks. For example, mutations in the cellular machinery that processes the inflammatory cytokine interleukin-1β (IL-1β) to its mature form cause hereditary auto-inflammatory diseases known as cryopyrin disorders (Figure 1a) [2]. Their established roles in immune cell function, coupled with their ability to bind small molecules, make other NHRs intriguing drug targets. Defining the tissue- and cell-specific functions of individual HDACs, coupled with development of isoform-selective HDAC inhibitors [48], will be needed to discover optimal therapeutic strategies for targeting this class of chromatin modulators. However, there are clear examples (e.g., IL-10 supplementation; IL-17A blockade in CD) where manipulation of individual cytokines has been ineffective, and studies of the genetics and physiology of these disorders has identified many intracellular proteins that contribute to disease pathogenesis. In addition, the discovery of risk and protective alleles for IBD in CARD9 suggests that scaffolding proteins may likewise be useful points of intervention [53]. Despite this success, several limitations of biopharmaceuticals hamper therapeutic manipulation of cytokine networks. 