One specific recurrent deletion (8.2 kb) eliminated exons 6 through 8 (Fig. They recur in independent tumors, involve multiple sets of cRSSs, overlap one another over a specific area of the locus and may provide for production of a modified (rather than absent) protein product. cRSS-mediated deletions and candidate driver mutationsCryptic RSS junctions affected genes with a potential oncogenic impact in that they govern cell proliferation, differentiation or survival. Almost 90% of cRSS junctions in the collection interrupted a gene and well over half of these genes (65%) were associated with cancer (for additional details see Supplemental Experimental procedures and Table S4). When a coding joint is created by deletion, the signal joint will occur on an excised circular DNA molecule ((Fujimoto and Yamagishi, 1987), Fig. To maximize the possibility of detection, we focused the effort on recurrent cRSS rearrangements. (Identification of cTrecs corresponding to potential oncogenic events does not, however, mean they are related to founder mutations, but rather reflects the evolving, multiclonal nature of the lymphomas, as noted in the Discussion.) The presence of specific cTrecs could conceivably provide an additional parameter for phenotyping human tumors as well as being an indicator of recent mutation. The presence of specific cTrecs could conceivably provide an additional parameter for phenotyping human tumors as well as being an indicator of recent mutation. Indeed, very few signal joints representing off target V(D)J recombination products have been reported thus far [e.g. This is the translocation between chr4 and chr14 creating a signal joint composed of the RSS of a TCR Vα-gene segment (chr14) and a cryptic RSS within Kdm1a locus (chr4; Fig. The 4:14 exchange illustrated that trans joining errors likely play a role in tumor formation, because there is abundant evidence that mutation of Kdm1a, a histone deacetylase gene, is significant in leukemia (Harris et al , 2012). Rag2 C-terminus- H3K4me3 interactions may enhance the fidelity of V(D)J recombinationComparison of genomic lesions in lymphomas from Rag2wt/wt, Tp53−/− and Rag2352/352, Tp53−/− mice revealed that although off target V(D)J recombination events are found in both genotypes, they are much more prevalent when Rag2 is C-terminally truncated. We considered several possible explanations for this observation. A more speculative suggestion is that replication of coding ends bearing unresolved hairpin termini, a DNA intermediate normally excluded from S phase, generates DNA palindromes which are known to provoke large scale rearrangements in mice, humans and yeast [(Coté and Lewis, 2008) and cited therein]. A more speculative suggestion is that replication of coding ends bearing unresolved hairpin termini, a DNA intermediate normally excluded from S phase, generates DNA palindromes which are known to provoke large scale rearrangements in mice, humans and yeast [(Coté and Lewis, 2008) and cited therein]. A more speculative suggestion is that replication of coding ends bearing unresolved hairpin termini, a DNA intermediate normally excluded from S phase, generates DNA palindromes which are known to provoke large scale rearrangements in mice, humans and yeast [(Coté and Lewis, 2008) and cited therein]. Whereas there is little question that Notch1, Jak1, Ikzf1, Fhit, and Pten, all included in the short, expertly curated list of 572 COSMIC Cancer Gene Census (http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/census/), are drivers in the oncogenic process, the four remaining recurrently mutated genes occupy a gray zone.To address this, we developed a system for stratifying all the genes mutated in the present study according cancer relevance (Experimental Procedures and Table S4). By this approach, Nr3c1 and Phlda1 belong to the same group as the above-mentioned genes and can also be considered cancer-associated. By this approach, Nr3c1 and Phlda1 belong to the same group as the above-mentioned genes and can also be considered cancer-associated. Agpat9 (Table S4B) and Trat1 however have modest or no support for a cancer role in the literature (see Table S4C). The Pten pathway is evidently an Achilles heel, given that Pten itself is recurrently mutated by cRSS mechanisms here (Fig.1) and in human T-ALL (Mendes et al , 2014). It remains to be seen whether cRSS-mediated deletions pinpoint new cancer genes, but given the potential applications, this question bears further investigation. It has been demonstrated that cRSS-rearrangements at Notch1 cause the production of a truncated, activating form of the protein (Ashworth et al , 2010; Jeannet et al , 2010). The commonly observed 8.2 kb cRSS-mediated deletion here is compatible with the possibility of an in-frame splice between exons 5 and 9 in the mRNA. 4), eliminating functions thought at present to be a pre-requisite for mediating the oncogenic effects of Jak1 activation. Engineered mouse models bearing mutant Rag2 alleles implicate the Rag2 C-terminal domain in curtailing the oncogenic potential of V(D)J recombination. Irrelevant “passenger” mutations are disfavored by the very short interval - within the first 14 weeks of life - in which tumors arise. Irrelevant “passenger” mutations are disfavored by the very short interval - within the first 14 weeks of life - in which tumors arise. Irrelevant “passenger” mutations are disfavored by the very short interval - within the first 14 weeks of life - in which tumors arise. Irrelevant “passenger” mutations are disfavored by the very short interval - within the first 14 weeks of life - in which tumors arise. 57 somatic SVs (range: 8–20) were identified in four Tp53−/− lymphomas and 218 SVs (range: 23–68) were detected in five Rag2352/352, Tp53−/− lymphomas (Fig. 57 somatic SVs (range: 8–20) were identified in four Tp53−/− lymphomas and 218 SVs (range: 23–68) were detected in five Rag2352/352, Tp53−/− lymphomas (Fig. When each is plotted according to their two distance-to-breakpoint values, authentic V(D)J junctions fell into a tight cluster averaging 3 nucleotides from either CAC motif. The presence of two populations in our experimental data was confirmed by analyzing a set of 180 simulated junctions (see Supplemental Experimental Procedures), which reconstructed only the broadly scattered distribution (Fig. These arise when hairpin-terminated RAG cleavage intermediates are nicked a few bp from the terminus and the opened ends happen to escape trimming before becoming joined. These data indicate that the CAC distance-to-breakpoint criteria indeed identify off target V(D)J recombination products.The CAC distance-to-breakpoint method was largely in agreement with the computational approach (Papaemmanuil et al  2014). 