Whereas thresholds for the multi-signal random-φ signal conditions were not different from those in the comparable single-frequency conditions, thresholds in both of the fixed-φ signal, all-coherent masker conditions were significantly elevated relative to the comparable single-frequency signal conditions; these trends held for both the equal and normalized level conditions. In that study there were three maskers, all 30-Hz wide and centered on the 4th–6th harmonics of 100, and the signal to be detected was a pure tone at one or more of those frequencies; all signals were presented at equal amplitude and with random starting phase. Mean thresholds in the comodulated masker conditions were more variable as a function of signal frequency, spanning about 3 dB. Mean thresholds in the comodulated masker conditions were more variable as a function of signal frequency, spanning about 3 dB. This result is consistent with the interpretation that individual differences in thresholds across frequency in the all-random masker conditions were reliable, such that across-frequency adjustments characterizing the normalized signal condition achieved equal signal audibility across frequency.In contrast to spectral integration computed for the all-random masker conditions, integration in the all-coherent masker conditions was uniformly negative. This threshold was also slightly poorer than the 50.0-dB threshold in the all-random masker, fixed-φ, equal signal condition (t5=3.19, p<0.05). This threshold was also slightly poorer than the 50.0-dB threshold in the all-random masker, fixed-φ, equal signal condition (t5=3.19, p<0.05). These comparisons suggest that fixing signal phase and level across frequency eliminates CMR and may elevate threshold above that obtained with a multi-frequency signal presented in random noise. That study reported results in terms of CMR, computed as the threshold in the multi-signal condition, with random signal starting phase, minus the mean single-frequency thresholds obtained with a single (on-signal) masker band; these values can be used to compute thresholds and CMR (Table 1; Hall et al , 1988). All observers were practiced in psychoacoustical tasks at the outset of the experiment, having participated in at least one prior experiment. One observer had previously participated in Experiment 1.2. Masker amplitude modulation, when present, was synchronized to the listening interval, such that the modulation in each 400-ms listening interval began in sine phase.3. Masker amplitude modulation, when present, was synchronized to the listening interval, such that the modulation in each 400-ms listening interval began in sine phase.3. The track continued for a total of 8 reversals, and threshold was estimated as the average signal level at the last 6 track reversals.Single-frequency thresholds were collected first and in random order blocked by frequency. In multi-frequency conditions signal level at threshold is reported in dB relative to the highest-level tone (i.e., the level of the tone at the frequency associated with the highest single-frequency threshold). Triangles show thresholds in Gaussian noise conditions, and squares show those in SAM noise; filled symbols correspond to thresholds obtained in an on-signal masker alone and open symbols correspond to those obtained in a complex of three masker bands. Triangles show thresholds in Gaussian noise conditions, and squares show those in SAM noise; filled symbols correspond to thresholds obtained in an on-signal masker alone and open symbols correspond to those obtained in a complex of three masker bands. In the original data of Obs 1, thresholds for the complex signal in SAM noise were quite variable, with two estimates near 40 dB SPL and two near 50 dB SPL. In the original data of Obs 1, thresholds for the complex signal in SAM noise were quite variable, with two estimates near 40 dB SPL and two near 50 dB SPL. There was no effect of MASKER (F1,6=5.35; p=0.06), no effect of FREQ (F2,12=1.27; p=0.32) and no interaction (F2,12=1.00; p=0. There was no effect of MASKER (F1,6=5.35; p=0.06), no effect of FREQ (F2,12=1.27; p=0.32) and no interaction (F2,12=1.00; p=0. There was no effect of MASKER (F1,6=5.35; p=0.06), no effect of FREQ (F2,12=1.27; p=0.32) and no interaction (F2,12=1.00; p=0. There was a main effect of MASKER (F1,6=14.60; p<0.01), no effect of FREQ (F2,12=2.15; p=0.16) and no interaction (F2,12=2.33; p=0.14). There was a main effect of MASKER (F1,6=14.60; p<0.01), no effect of FREQ (F2,12=2.15; p=0.16) and no interaction (F2,12=2.33; p=0.14). The form of spectral integration for tones presented in coherently amplitude modulated masker bands is less clear. The form of spectral integration for tones presented in coherently amplitude modulated masker bands is less clear. The form of spectral integration for tones presented in coherently amplitude modulated masker bands is less clear. In these conditions there were three masker bands present, each with a signal tone, and symbol shading indicates the single-signal conditions used to normalize the relative levels of the three signal tones, either the on-signal masker (filled symbols) or complex masker (open symbols) conditions. For Obs 3, the multi-signal threshold in the on-signal, noise condition was 0.11 dB higher than the highest associated single-signal condition.Table 2 shows the mean spectral integration across individual observers. When signal tone level was normalized based on thresholds from the on-signal, single-frequency conditions, the estimates of spectral integration differed for noise and SAM noise conditions. One unexpected finding is that estimates of spectral integration based on single-frequency thresholds in the complex masker are significantly greater than the expected 2.4 dB (p<0.05) for both the noise and SAM noise conditions. Grose and Hall (1997) reported that spectral integration for a family of pure tone signals in random narrowband noise followed the Grose and Hall (1997) reported that spectral integration for a family of pure tone signals in random narrowband noise followed the In the present paradigm thresholds for a 500-Hz signal measured in the random noise conditions were on average 1.3 dB greater in the complex than in the on-signal masker, suggesting that some of the improvement observed could be due to a release from across-channel masking (Moore et al , 1990a). The best thresholds for a multi-frequency signal failed to show a positive spectral integration, however. The best thresholds for a multi-frequency signal failed to show a positive spectral integration, however. The differences in integration across studies are related in part to the choice of single-component signal condition used as baseline For example, Grose et al  (2005) defined integration relative to threshold for a single pure tone in the presence of four comodulated noise bands, whereas Bacon et al  (2002) defined it relative to pure tone detection threshold in a single band of noise. Data were mostly consistent with that hypothesis. The differences in outcome between the experiments may well arise because of stimulus differences. This reasoning is consistent with estimates of masking release. This reasoning is consistent with estimates of masking release. In Experiment 2 thresholds in the three-band SAM noise improved by 0.2 to 3.4 dB (mean 2.0 dB) relative to the on-signal SAM masker threshold, suggesting that flanking masker bands were less beneficial to pure tone signal detection in the second experiment. The two studies on spectral integration in CMR previously reported from our lab are generally consistent with this idea. The two studies on spectral integration in CMR previously reported from our lab are generally consistent with this idea. Data on detection of multi-frequency signals have been interpreted as discriminating between potential cues in CMR. All observers were practiced in psychoacoustical tasks at the outset of the experiment, having participated in at least one prior experiment.2. Fixing starting phase and comparing signals at −5 and 0 dB SNR, the overall level is incremented by a median of 1.8 dB and the envelope correlation across bands is relatively unchanged, with a median of r=0.96. Those intervals were marked visually and separated by 250 ms. In the normalized multi-signal conditions thresholds are reported in dB relative to the lowest-level tone (i.e., the level of the tone at the frequency associated with the lowest single-frequency threshold). In contrast, thresholds in the all-coherent masker are on average 8.9 dB lower than those in the other two conditions. This CMR appears relatively constant across frequency, with the exception of the lowest frequency, where the all-coherent threshold is elevated by approximately 3 dB.These observations were confirmed with a repeated-measures ANOVA, with three levels of MASKER (on-signal, all-random, all-coherent) and five levels of FREQ (276, 525, 1000276, 525, 1904, 3624). There was a main effect of MASKER (F2,10=90.33, p<0.0001), a main effect of FREQ (F4,20=3.11, p<0.05) and a significant interaction (F8,40=3.09, p<0.01). 