We have shown that ROCK1-mediated activation of JNK is required for UVB-induced apoptosis. We have shown that ROCK1-mediated activation of JNK is required for UVB-induced apoptosis. We showed that upon exposure to UVB-induced stress, ROCK1 was activated, bound to and phosphorylated JIP-3, and consequently activated JNK. JIP-3 is known to activate JNK signaling through the coordination of MAPK kinase (MEK), MAPK kinase 7 (MKK7), JNK, and c-Jun. Further understanding of the control of ROCK, RhoA, and Rho-GEF gene expression by JIP-3 would be invaluable. Some studies have presented alternative means to activate ROCK1 that include binding of ROCK1 to arachidonic acid, oligomerization of ROCK1, or cleavage of ROCK1 by caspase-3 during apoptosis or differentiation (15). Our study sheds new light on the mechanism of upstream regulation of JNK-mediated apoptosis, an area of emerging interest with clinical relevance to common human diseases such as diabetes (47) and cancer (48). It is well known that ROCKs affect such cellular processes as apoptosis, adhesion, migration, proliferation, and metabolism (6-9, 11, 14, 16). It is well established that deregulation of Rho-ROCK signaling in tumors has been linked to increased invasion and metastasis (49-51). Because ROCK is involved in different biological processes, it is an important therapeutic target for the treatment of various human diseases including cancers, cardiovascular diseases, and neurological disorders. The gel was dried and exposed to film. The gel slice was excised for radioactive counting. Ten micrograms of the FLAG-purified material was incubated with recombinant ROCK1 (Upstate Biotechnology) in 50 μl of kinase mixture (20 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 5 mM MgCl2, 100 mM KCl, 0.1 mM DTT, 100 μM ATP, 1 mM EDTA, 1 μM microcystin-LR, and 1 μCi [γ-32P]ATP) and incubated at 30°C for 30 min. Ten microliters of kinase reaction was subjected to SDS-PAGE. Ten microliters of kinase reaction was subjected to SDS-PAGE. Ten microliters of kinase reaction was subjected to SDS-PAGE. The proteins were analyzed by the Mass Spectrometry Facility at Emory University. For glycerol gradient sedimentation, 200 μl of Ni2+ column eluate from His-ROCK1-transfected 293ET cells was loaded on the top of a 4.5-ml 10 to 40% glycerol gradient cushion in Buffer A containing 100 mM KCl and centrifuged for 10 hours at 50,000 rpm (Beckman, SW55Ti). After centrifugation, individual fractions (200 μl) were collected from top to bottom. Five microliters of each fraction was analyzed by Western blotting. Flow cytometry and apoptosis assaysCell death as determined by the fragmentation of DNA was measured by photometric enzyme immunoassay with the Cell Death Detection ELISA kit (Roche Applied Science) following the manufacturer’s suggested protocol. The cells were fixed for 3 hours with 2% paraformaldehyde in PBS at room temperature. The cells were fixed for 3 hours with 2% paraformaldehyde in PBS at room temperature. The cells were fixed for 3 hours with 2% paraformaldehyde in PBS at room temperature. The plates were incubated at 37°C for 90 min and the signal was read at 405 nm. Briefly, 10 μl containing 20 μg of protein extract was incubated with 90 μl of kinase buffer containing 0.1 mM ATP. Although ROCK plays an important role in apoptosis, the mechanism of its action is obscure. Eight-week-old ROCK1+/- mice and their WT littermates were used for UVB-exposure experiments. On the next day, the anesthetized animals were irradiated by UVB with the use of a custom-made UVB-irradiation apparatus with four photochemical lamps (RPR 3000, Southern N.E. The animals were killed at 8 and 24 hours after UVB exposure. The skin was embedded in tissue-freezing medium (TBS, NC) and 7-μm frozen sections of tissue were obtained from the skins of animals subjected to different doses of UVB exposure. The interaction between JIP-3 and ROCK1 was additionally confirmed by reciprocal immunoprecipitations from 293ET cells that were transiently transfected with His-ROCK1 and FLAG-tagged JIP-3 (FLAG-JIP-3) (Fig. To map the JIP-3-binding region(s) of ROCK1, we carried out pull-down experiments with constructs expressing different truncated forms of ROCK1, along with FLAG-JIP-3 or empty vector (pcDNA3), transfected into 293ET cells. JIP-3 bound to the N-terminus of ROCK1 containing the kinase domain (fig. ROCK1 phosphorylates its substrates at the consensus sequences R/KXS/T or R/KXXS/T, in which the position of Arg (R) or Lys (K) residues is critical (15, 16, 25). 2B, right panel, lane 9) after 30 min incubation, and this effect was blocked by a ROCK inhibitor, Y-27632 (Fig. Tandem mass spectrometry was performed to map the Ser/Thr phosphorylation sites in JIP-3. We found three Ser phosphorylation sites in JIP-3:Ser318, Ser368, and Ser369 from the phosphorylated peptides RDSRNMEVQVTQE (the tryptic peptide encompassing residues 316 to 328), and RTGSSPTQGIVNK (the tryptic peptide encompassing residues 365 to 377), respectively (Fig. S2), and cosedimentation of JNK, RhoA, and ROCK1 was observed in fractions 15 to 17, suggesting that ROCK1 and JIP-3 formed a complex with a link to JNK. We next tested the hypothesis that ROCK1-mediated phosphorylation of JIP-3 is required for the interaction between JIP-3 and JNK. We next tested the hypothesis that ROCK1-mediated phosphorylation of JIP-3 is required for the interaction between JIP-3 and JNK. The functional importance of the newly identified phosphorylation sites of JIP-3 was tested by generating point mutations of the target Ser residues in JIP-3. Previous studies showed that ROCK1-mediated apoptosis is one of the apoptotic pathways triggered during genotoxic stress (20). Previous studies showed that ROCK1-mediated apoptosis is one of the apoptotic pathways triggered during genotoxic stress (20). We also studied whether Y-27632 could affect the UVB-induced apoptotic response. 