In general, methyl-plus TFs often preferred to bind to unmethylated and methylated sites that were different from each other (fig. The differences observed were, in almost all cases, due to changes in the frequency of one or more CpG dinucleotide(s) (data S2). The differences observed were, in almost all cases, due to changes in the frequency of one or more CpG dinucleotide(s) (data S2). This process, together with the inheritance of cytoplasmic determinants such as TFs, forms the basis of the epigenetic memory that allows cellular inheritance of acquired characteristics, such as the state of differentiation [for example, (14)]. This process, together with the inheritance of cytoplasmic determinants such as TFs, forms the basis of the epigenetic memory that allows cellular inheritance of acquired characteristics, such as the state of differentiation [for example, (14)]. The results were broadly consistent with the in vitro analyses (data S3 and table S4). Within the 48-hour incubation period, the methylation state of the bound sites was not strongly affected (fig. Solving the structures and comparing them with previously solved HOX protein structures (55–60) revealed a very similar architecture of the DBD, with an expected core consisting of three α-helices (Fig. HOXB13 Ile262 forms a hydrophobic contact with the first methylcytosine, whereas Val269 recognizes the second methylcytosine opposite to the guanine of the TCG sequence (Fig. HOXB13 Ile262 forms a hydrophobic contact with the first methylcytosine, whereas Val269 recognizes the second methylcytosine opposite to the guanine of the TCG sequence (Fig. HOXB13 Ile262 forms a hydrophobic contact with the first methylcytosine, whereas Val269 recognizes the second methylcytosine opposite to the guanine of the TCG sequence (Fig. This collection included 84% of the high-confidence TFs described by Vaquerizas et al  (23) (classes a and b; table S1). This collection included 84% of the high-confidence TFs described by Vaquerizas et al  (23) (classes a and b; table S1). To determine whether the mechanism of recognition of mCpG by homeodomains is general, we solved the structures of three additional homeodomain proteins: CDX1, CDX2, and LHX4 (Fig. The aliphatic chain of Arg127 also supports the hydrophobic interaction (Fig. This difference from our results is explained by four mechanisms. Thus, methylation can act to select the factor that binds to a target sequence. Our structural analysis of homeodomains reveals that mCpG is recognized through direct hydrophobic interactions between amino acids and the 5-methyl group of the methylcytosine. We (21, 26, 27) and others have previously established that motifs generated using HT-SELEX are similar to those obtained using other state-of-the-art methods, such as protein-binding microarrays or bacterial one-hybrid assays (28, 29), and are biologically relevant on the basis of their ability to predict TF binding in vivo (30–32). We (21, 26, 27) and others have previously established that motifs generated using HT-SELEX are similar to those obtained using other state-of-the-art methods, such as protein-binding microarrays or bacterial one-hybrid assays (28, 29), and are biologically relevant on the basis of their ability to predict TF binding in vivo (30–32). Given the structural similarity of thymine and methylcytosine and the identical position of their 5-methyl groups, it is difficult to determine why the preference of TFs for mCpG has evolved. However, their preference for mCpG varies as a function of the hydrophobicity of amino acid residues at three positions. This may explain in part the ability of POU5F1 to reprogram differentiated cells toward a pluripotent fate (48). This may explain in part the ability of POU5F1 to reprogram differentiated cells toward a pluripotent fate (48). The process was repeated up to four times, and the ligands were amplified by PCR, and sequenced after each cycle. The process was repeated up to four times, and the ligands were amplified by PCR, and sequenced after each cycle. The methylation reaction was optimized by testing the methylation state of the ligands by the methylation-specific restriction enzyme BstBI (fig. Thus, the motifs presented here can be directly used for motif matching using a threshold, where only the rank of the affinities affects the outcome. However, some hemimethylated DNA is likely to exist in the assay. However, some hemimethylated DNA is likely to exist in the assay. However, some hemimethylated DNA is likely to exist in the assay. However, some hemimethylated DNA is likely to exist in the assay. However, some hemimethylated DNA is likely to exist in the assay. However, some hemimethylated DNA is likely to exist in the assay. The mixture of CpG methylated and unmethylated oligos was subsequently subjected to an additional cycle (cycle 4) of the SELEX process and the enriched oligos were eluted in 70 μl of milli-Q water. The mixture of CpG methylated and unmethylated oligos was subsequently subjected to an additional cycle (cycle 4) of the SELEX process and the enriched oligos were eluted in 70 μl of milli-Q water. For both cycles 3 and 4, the normalized frequency of methylated fnmCG was calculated from the following equation: fnmCG = sf × fmCG, where size factor sf = 1/(fumCG + fmCG + pseudocount), and frequency of unmethylated CG fumCG = [(fYG − fTG) + (fCG − fmCG)]/2; YG is the TG count after bisulfite treatment (umCGand TG) and pseudocount of 10−9 was included to avoid division by zero. For both cycles 3 and 4, the normalized frequency of methylated fnmCG was calculated from the following equation: fnmCG = sf × fmCG, where size factor sf = 1/(fumCG + fmCG + pseudocount), and frequency of unmethylated CG fumCG = [(fYG − fTG) + (fCG − fmCG)]/2; YG is the TG count after bisulfite treatment (umCGand TG) and pseudocount of 10−9 was included to avoid division by zero. For both cycles 3 and 4, the normalized frequency of methylated fnmCG was calculated from the following equation: fnmCG = sf × fmCG, where size factor sf = 1/(fumCG + fmCG + pseudocount), and frequency of unmethylated CG fumCG = [(fYG − fTG) + (fCG − fmCG)]/2; YG is the TG count after bisulfite treatment (umCGand TG) and pseudocount of 10−9 was included to avoid division by zero. The 23 cases where data of bisulfite-SELEX and methyl-SELEX or replicates between two bisulfite-SELEX experiments were inconsistent were not classified and are labeled “inconclusive” in table S3. Reaction volume was adjusted to 150 µl with 0.005% Triton X-100 and incubated at 37°C for 3 hours. 1B).The coverage of individual TFs was considerably higher than that reported in previous systematic studies (26, 35–37). 1B).The coverage of individual TFs was considerably higher than that reported in previous systematic studies (26, 35–37). Protein-bound microarrays were scanned to detect Alexa Fluor 647-conjugated anti-GST at 640 nm. To estimate the relative preference for each 8-mer, the Z-score was calculated from the average signal intensity across the 16 or 32 spots containing each 8-mer (11). The transduction was performed in the presence of 8 µg/ml polybrene. The transduction was performed in the presence of 8 µg/ml polybrene. Briefly, the cells were fixed in 1% formaldehyde for 10 min at room temperature followed by addition of 0.125 M glycine. Dynal protein-G magnetic beads (Invitrogen) were pre-washed with 5mg/ml BSA in PBS for a total of 5 times and resuspended in 100 ul of wash buffer. To the remaining, 100 µl of antibody-coupled magnetic beads were added and incubated on a rotator overnight at 4°C. After incubation, beads were washed 5 times with LiCl wash buffer (100 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.5, 500 mM LiCl, 1% NP-40, and 1% sodium deoxycholate) and followed by two washes with 10 mM Tris-Cl (pH 8.0) containing 1 mM EDTA. Chromatin-antibody samples were eluted from beads by incubating for 1 hour at 65°C in IP elution buffer (1% SDS, 0.1 M NaHCO3, in 10 mM Tris-Cl, pH 7.5), followed by overnight incubation at 65°C to reverse cross-linking. ChIP-exo data of KLF5 from LoVo cells were from Katainen et al  (43).Raw sequencing reads from ChIP libraries were mapped to the human reference genome (hg19) or mouse reference genome (mm9), using bwa (72) with default parameters. Top scoring 300,000 sites recognized by each motif were searched from the human or mouse genome using program MOODS (77) with P value cut-off of 10−4 and score cut-off of 5. Extraction of methylation calls was done with Bismark methylation extractor discarding first 10 bp of both reads and reading methylation calls of overlapping parts of the paired reads from the first read (–no_overlap parameter). In total, HT-SELEX models now exist for 632 of the ~1400 (23) human TFs. In total, HT-SELEX models now exist for 632 of the ~1400 (23) human TFs. In total, HT-SELEX models now exist for 632 of the ~1400 (23) human TFs. In total, HT-SELEX models now exist for 632 of the ~1400 (23) human TFs. narrowPeak), similar to the previous study by Stadler et al  (8) and heatmaps were generated using deepTools (version 2.4.1) (81). narrowPeak), similar to the previous study by Stadler et al  (8) and heatmaps were generated using deepTools (version 2.4.1) (81). narrowPeak), similar to the previous study by Stadler et al  (8) and heatmaps were generated using deepTools (version 2.4.1) (81). Tagmentation was performed in shaking incubator (650 rpm) at 37°C for 1 hour. no.EO0491) were added and reaction further incubated at 40°C for 30minwith vigorous shaking (650 rpm). ATAC-seq alignment and peak calling statistics are summarized in table S4. Analysis of motif conservation and similarityTo determine whether matches to the motifs were conserved, the genomic sites matching a methyl-SELEX or HT-SELEX motif were analyzed according to (64) and the procedure detected genomic conservation for 598 out of 900 motifs (66.4%) at family-wise error rate <0.05. Briefly, twenty thousand top affinity sites for each motif was selected from the human constrained elements (not full genome, only sequences conserved in mammals) and checked for conservation in 99 vertebrate species (multiple alignment downloaded from UCSC genome browser, version hg19) according to the motif as explained in (64). The conservation pattern was constructed by averaging the π frequencies at each position across the conserved sites. The difference logo between HT-SELEX motif and the conservation pattern was made by subtracting the corresponding base frequencies.Motif similarity was calculated using SSTAT (42) with a stringent type I error threshold 0.01 to limit the effect of low affinity sites (other parameters 50% GC-content background model, pseudocount regularization). Binding models were then connected to each other if their SSTAT similarity score was > 1.5 × 10−5. HOXB13-MethDNA complex was crystallized from the solution containing 50 mM Tris buffer (pH 8.0), 100 mM MgCl2, 150 mM KCl, 24% (w/v) PEG(3350) and 8% of methyl propanol. CDX1-MethDNA and CDX2-MethDNA complexes were crystalized from the solution containing 50 mM Tris buffer (pH 8.0), 100 mM MgCl2, 150 mM KCl, 28.8% (w/v) PEGmme(5000) and 5% of MPD for CDX1_methDNA or 8% of polyethylene glycol (400) for CDX2_methDNA. Statistics of data collection are presented in table S6.All structures were solved by molecular replacement technique using program Phaser (89) as implemented in Phenix (90) and CCP4 (88), and Molrep under CCP4 program suite. The found solution for MEIS1 was fixed and the coordinates of HOXA9 from HOXA9/PBX1 complex (PDB entry 1PUF) were used to determine the position of HOXB13. The first 3 and last 4 amino acids from N- and C- termini of the first subunit as well as 7 first amino acids of N-terminal and 4 last of the C-terminal of second one were found disordered and were not included into the final model. The refinement statistics are presented in table S6. Supplemental data S1 A third class of TFs did not bind to, or bound more weakly to, methylated versions of their recognition sequences (Fig. A third class of TFs did not bind to, or bound more weakly to, methylated versions of their recognition sequences (Fig. S4; see the methods for details). S4; see the methods for details). These TFs were classified as methyl-minus type B (Fig. These TFs were classified as methyl-minus type B (Fig. These TFs were classified as methyl-minus type B (Fig. The methyl-minus group included several proteins for which previous evidence exists for inhibition of binding by mCpG (9, 10, 12, 17, 18) (fig. The methyl-minus group included several proteins for which previous evidence exists for inhibition of binding by mCpG (9, 10, 12, 17, 18) (fig. The methyl-minus group included several proteins for which previous evidence exists for inhibition of binding by mCpG (9, 10, 12, 17, 18) (fig. To validate the results by a different experimental method, we enzymatically methylated (11) protein-binding microarrays (35); seven of the eight assignments based on methyl-SELEX were confirmed by this analysis (fig. To validate the results by a different experimental method, we enzymatically methylated (11) protein-binding microarrays (35); seven of the eight assignments based on methyl-SELEX were confirmed by this analysis (fig. To validate the results by a different experimental method, we enzymatically methylated (11) protein-binding microarrays (35); seven of the eight assignments based on methyl-SELEX were confirmed by this analysis (fig. To validate the results by a different experimental method, we enzymatically methylated (11) protein-binding microarrays (35); seven of the eight assignments based on methyl-SELEX were confirmed by this analysis (fig. To validate the results by a different experimental method, we enzymatically methylated (11) protein-binding microarrays (35); seven of the eight assignments based on methyl-SELEX were confirmed by this analysis (fig. To determine the effect of methylation of individual CpGs on TF binding, we calculated the percentage of increase of mCpG at specific positions within motifs during the bisulfite-SELEX experiment (see the methods). Methylation of individual CpG sites commonly affected TF binding, with effects ranging from −100 to +380% (Fig. Thus, depending on the presence or absence of a CpG dinucleotide, many TFs can bind in a biologically relevant affinity range to both methylation-sensitive and -insensitive sites. 