As seen previously, expression of MT-hTer-47A in LOX melanoma cells led to rapid growth inhibition in comparison to a WT-hTER control (Fig. To explore the role of ATM in the MT-hTer-47A response, LOX melanoma cells were first treated with anti-ATM shRNA or control “scramble” shRNA, followed 48 hours later by WT-hTER or MT-hTer-47A. To explore the role of ATM in the MT-hTer-47A response, LOX melanoma cells were first treated with anti-ATM shRNA or control “scramble” shRNA, followed 48 hours later by WT-hTER or MT-hTer-47A. To explore the role of ATM in the MT-hTer-47A response, LOX melanoma cells were first treated with anti-ATM shRNA or control “scramble” shRNA, followed 48 hours later by WT-hTER or MT-hTer-47A. Furthermore, the influence of the two shRNAs directly correlated with their ability to knockdown ATM. As seen with the ATM shRNAs, KU-55933 partially rescued the growth of MT-hTer-47A-treated LOX cells in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. As seen with the ATM shRNAs, KU-55933 partially rescued the growth of MT-hTer-47A-treated LOX cells in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. As seen with the ATM shRNAs, KU-55933 partially rescued the growth of MT-hTer-47A-treated LOX cells in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. As seen with the ATM shRNAs, KU-55933 partially rescued the growth of MT-hTer-47A-treated LOX cells in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. As seen with the ATM shRNAs, KU-55933 partially rescued the growth of MT-hTer-47A-treated LOX cells in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. As seen with the ATM shRNAs, KU-55933 partially rescued the growth of MT-hTer-47A-treated LOX cells in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. The lentiviral hTER constructs resulted in WT-hTER and MT-hTer-47A overexpression 20-40 fold higher than the endogenous hTER levels (data not shown). As expected, our UM-UC-3 cells carried the phenylalanine (TTC) to cysteine (TGC) mutation at codon 113 of p53 as reported previously (data not shown)(38).We first demonstrated that ATM depletion alone has no detectable effect on UM-UC-3 telomere length over our 10-day experimental period (Supplementary Fig. 5A, compare lanes 1 and 3), while in the ATM-depleted cells the median TRF length of the bulk cell population increased markedly to ∼5.9 kb (Fig. Strikingly, ATM depletion largely blocks end-to-end fusion of the MT-hTer-47A-induced dysfunctional telomeres. While our study uses a different method of telomere disruption (mutant repeat incorporation), we have likewise found that fusion of MT-hTer-47A-induced dysfunctional telomeres is largely ATM-dependent in human cancer cells. Telomere shortening in cells with checkpoint deficiencies ultimately leads to what has been termed “M2 crisis,” in which numerous short telomeres undergo end-to-end fusions (41). This “crisis-like” model fits well with several characteristics of MT-hTer-47A growth inhibition. This “crisis-like” model fits well with several characteristics of MT-hTer-47A growth inhibition. This “crisis-like” model fits well with several characteristics of MT-hTer-47A growth inhibition. Finally, a role for fusions in MT-hTer-47A-induced cytotoxicity can explain why ATM depletion sensitizes cancer cells to agents which cause intrachromosomal DSBs but desensitizes them to MT-hTer-47A. However, that induction was also dependent on the presence of wild-type p53, while the MT-hTer-47A growth effect reported here is not. Alternatively, other DNA damage response pathways may also respond to MT-hTer-47A-induced dysfunctional telomeres. The work presented here suggests that tumors with low-to-absent ATM, which include certain leukemias and a subset of breast cancers, may have a muted response to MT-hTer-47A treatment (45, 46). Given this heterogeneity, it is likely that other MT-hTers will not show the same level of dependency on ATM signaling and therefore work more effectively in the context of ATM-deficient tumors (Dana Smith and Elizabeth Blackburn, unpublished data)(7, 48). Given this heterogeneity, it is likely that other MT-hTers will not show the same level of dependency on ATM signaling and therefore work more effectively in the context of ATM-deficient tumors (Dana Smith and Elizabeth Blackburn, unpublished data)(7, 48). In experiments involving prolonged cell growth, ATM disruption causes an increase in the number of telomeric fusions detected, which may be due to the accelerated telomere shortening of ATM-deficient cells or to enhanced survival of cells with end-to-end fusions (19, 20). The complexes composed of these proteins, which in mammals have been termed shelterin, prevent the chromosome ends from being treated as DNA breaks and undergoing inappropriate repair processes (2). The shRNA expression lentivectors were constructed as described previously (13). The shRNA expression lentivectors were constructed as described previously (13). The shRNA expression lentivectors were constructed as described previously (13). Cells were split as needed to maintain logarithmic growth. Cells were harvested at indicated time points and stained with Trypan blue. Once a certain critical length is reached, shelterin complexes are no longer effective in preventing the chromosome ends from initiating a DNA damage response, ultimately leading to cellular senescence or apoptosis (4, 5). Immunostaining was performed with rabbit anti-Rap1 (Bethyl Laboratories) and mouse anti-ATM pS1981 (Rockland), followed by the appropriate secondary Alexa Fluor 488 or 568 antibody (Molecular Probes)(11, 15). The enzyme telomerase, which is minimally composed of a protein reverse transcriptase (hTERT) and a template-containing RNA (hTER), counteracts telomere shortening by adding new TTAGGG repeats to the 3′ ends of the chromosomes (1). The enzyme telomerase, which is minimally composed of a protein reverse transcriptase (hTERT) and a template-containing RNA (hTER), counteracts telomere shortening by adding new TTAGGG repeats to the 3′ ends of the chromosomes (1). Images were acquired using the Deltavision SoftWorx 3D capture program. Western blot analysis was performed with the following antibodies: mouse anti-ATM pS1981 (Rockland), mouse anti-ATM (2C1, GeneTex, Inc.), and horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated mouse anti-β actin (Abcam). The following primers were used for qPCR: 5′-TCACGTCATCCAGCAGAGAATGGA-3′ and 5′-CACACGGCAGGCATACTCATCTTT-3′ (β2-microglobulin); 5′-TTGCGGAGGGTGGGCCT-3′ and 5′-CGGGCCAGCAGCTGACATT-3′ (hTER). Automated sequencing was then performed on both strands with the following nested primers: 5′-AGATGAAGCTCCCAGAATGCCAGA-3′ and 5′-ATACGGCCAGGCATTGAAGTCTCA-3′. Telomeric Southern BlottingUM-UC-3 genomic DNA was digested with HinfI and RsaI and run on a 0.6% agarose gel with 5 μg of DNA per lane. For detection of mutant repeats, a 32P-labeled 5′-(CCCAAA)4-3′ probe was used along with a 4-fold excess of unlabeled 5′-(CCCTAA)4-3′ and 5′-(CCCCAA)4-3′ oligonucleotides to block cross-hybridization to wild-type and subtelomeric sequences (9). 