By this extension of the definition, activities such as administering an anti-inflammatory drug to prevent activation of the innate immune response, having ones nuclear DNA in the center of the cell where O2 tension is the lowest, even putting on a hat to protect oneself from UVA, can all be defined as antioxidant activities. Both activities are arguably more kinetically favorable (and therefore more druggable) than directly intercepting free radicals.There are compounds that may indeed improve ROS/RNS interception in biologic systems without directly intercepting free radicals. How I met Helmut Interestingly, as most classical “free radical scavengers” are nucleophiles, they are often very good activators of the Nrf2/keap1 system and may mediate their effects via this pathway [37]. A gradient of oxygen exists in liver lobule [3], which makes it exquisitely prone to hypoxia in downstream regions. My time at Düsseldorf had a tremendous personal impact on me. My time at Düsseldorf had a tremendous personal impact on me. Furthermore, as mentioned above, my German was nonexistant prior to coming to Düsseldorf. It had been proposed in the early 1970’s that ethanol consumption causes hepatic hypoxia [4]. We have built a life together and our children are perfectly comfortable in either English or German and think nothing about traveling overseas. These days, there are clear metrics by which one can measure the direct impact of a scientist on the field (# publications, H-index, i10-index, etc). Furthermore, Helmut has always been a very enthusiast supporter of fellow researchers and science; his service to Archives of Biochemistry and Biophysics is a prime example. My dissertation research brought Helmut’s work to light for me. First, he published seminal work demonstrating that cells have steep intracellular oxygen gradients [12], which was critical for justifying the invalidity of using blood oxygen tension to determine intracellular oxygen concentrations. It was in this timeframe that Helmut’s group was describing a new function of selenoproteins (and organoselenium compounds) as peroxynitrite reductases [14]. We also investigated the interaction of catechin oligomers and organotellurium compounds with peroxynitrite and/or it’s degradation products [17–19]. This latter project suggested that selenoprotein P potentially functions as protective ‘coating’ on the glycocalyx, a function similar to what is hypothesized for extracellular superoxide dismutase [21]. Mostly notably, he promoted me to “Arbeitsgruppenleiter” in 1999; Helmut’s Institut was very large and was broken up in smaller research teams (Arbeitsgruppen) with related research themes. I have always been thankful for this experience, as it made transitioning to a to a PI later in my career a much less painful process. I returned to in vivo hepatobiology at the beginning of 2000. The concept that NO• production was both protective (via eNOS to maintain hepatic vascular tone) and damaging (via iNOS to produce RNS) was viewed as novel. In this time-frame, I was asked to write a review article on the subject of oxidative stress in alcoholic liver disease [27]. The elegance of Helmut’s original definition of oxidative stress [2] belies the complexity of the reactions that are potentially involved. These studies illustrate my point that there are some concepts that I believe are of utmost importance when translating oxidative stress into in vivo research. Kinetics is king … but concentration is queenWhen a compound (or protein) is called an ‘antioxidant,’ it is most often assumed that this compound directly intercepts a prooxidant (i.e., “free radical scavenger”). Few compounds identified thus far have that rapid of a reaction.This first-approximation approach to predict relevance of a ROS/ RNS interception reaction is informative, but doesn’t take into account other aspects. 