However, BRD3 occupies this locus with endoderm differentiation (Table S3). MNase can target both DNA and RNA; however, its RNase activity can be inhibited by heavy metal cations (Extended Data Figure 6E and 6F)40. MNase can target both DNA and RNA; however, its RNase activity can be inhibited by heavy metal cations (Extended Data Figure 6E and 6F)40. We quantified enrichment of the lncRNAs MALAT1 and MEG3 as controls. These results show that BRD3 and DIGIT are both enriched in regions of chromatin modified by H3K18ac. BRD3 binds H3K18ac, and during endoderm differentiation BRD3 shifts from promoters to enhancers within regions also occupied by H3K18ac. Acetylation of H3K18 at Gsc requires both SMAD4 and TRIM33, each of which interacts with SMAD2/3 in response to activin signaling, and H3K18ac may also act to recruit TRIM3346. Future investigation will be required to elucidate how RNAs may affect recognition of acetylated histones. Error bars represent the standard deviation of n=3 independent experiments. Annotated GATA6-AS transcripts are shown in red and the transcript cloned in DE cells is shown in black. **** indicates p <0.0001 compared to day 0 (One-way ANOVA, n=4 independent experiments). This experiment was performed twice with similar results. BRD3 RIP normalized to IgG (center) and input (right) are shown for hESCs. Points are colored to indicate different thresholds as labeled on the far right. We confirmed that the DIGIT-4xS1m transcript was retained in the nucleus after transient transfection (Figure 1A), as previously described for endogenous DIGIT4, and precipitated DIGIT-4xS1m with streptavidin beads in UV cross-linked cells (Figure 1B). This experiment was performed twice with similar results. This experiment was performed twice with similar results. This experiment was performed twice with similar results. This experiment was performed twice with similar results. (A) PONDR VSL2 plots showing the ordered and disordered regions of the long (left) and short (middle) isoforms of BRD3, and BRD2 (right). The site targeted by gRNA is indicated with an arrow. The start of the coding sequence (CDS) is indicated, and the mEGFP cDNA is inserted in frame after the start codon. (C) Design of the homology vector for the insertion of mEGFP. The genomic locations of homology arms are indicated. The genomic locations of homology arms are indicated. This experiment was performed twice with similar results. Scale bar represents 2 μm. This experiment was performed twice with similar results. Extended Data Figure 5.Homology construct for targeting BRD3, and analysis of long and short isoforms of BRD3. We performed UV cross-linking followed by streptavidin precipitation and mass spectrometry (MS). Primers that uniquely recognize either the long (left) or short (right) isoforms of BRD3 were used for amplification. Expression of CXCR4 and SOX17 was quantified by qRT-PCR after three days of DE differentiation. Ectopic expression of both the long and short isoform of BRD3 rescued expression of CXCR4 and SOX17. Extended Data Figure 6.Binding of BRD3 to modified histones, effects of inhibition of P300 on the enrichment of BRD3, the activity of MNase in presence of Ba+2 and Sr+2 cations, and enrichment of lncRNAs in specific histone modifications. (C) Immunoblots to detect the levels of acetylation on H3K18 and H3K27, as well as levels of BRD3 and total H3 in hESCs treated with DMSO, A485, or GNE049. This experiment was performed twice with similar results. This experiment was performed twice with similar results. Statistical source data are provided in Source data extended data Fig. Extended Data Figure 7.BRD3 occupies endoderm genes and enhancers and interaction between BRD3 and DIGIT is not dependent on location of transcription. BRD3 regions are defined as containing promoters if the region is located within 2kb of a transcription start site (TSS). The bold horizontal line represents the median for each box plot. The lower whiskers represent Q1–1.5*(Q3-Q1) and the upper whisker represents Q3+1.5*(Q3-Q1). Extended Data Figure 8.BRD3 occupancy at genes not regulated by DIGIT.ChIP-seq data shows H3K18ac (top, green) and BRD3 occupancy (bottom, black) at HEXIM2, PITX2/PANCR and ZAP70 in hESCs and endoderm/mesendoderm cells. Supplementary Table 1 Supplementary Table 2 Supplementary Table 4 Source Data Extended Data Fig 4 Source Data Extended Data Fig 4 Source Data Extended Data Fig 4 Future studies are needed to determine if DIGIT, BRD3 and SMARCD1 are present in the same complex.To understand how BRD3 interacts with the entire transcriptome, we performed RIP using an antibody against BRD3 followed by sequencing of precipitated RNA. BRD3 shows specificity for DIGIT compared to BRD2 and BRD4BRD2, BRD3 and BRD4 but not BRDT are expressed in endoderm cells (Extended Data Figure 2E), and we asked if the other BET proteins interact with DIGIT. We found similar results in a repeat experiment (Extended Data Figure 3C and 3D). We found similar results in a repeat experiment (Extended Data Figure 3C and 3D). We found similar results in a repeat experiment (Extended Data Figure 3C and 3D). We found similar results in a repeat experiment (Extended Data Figure 3C and 3D). BET proteins contain two bromodomains, which bind acetylated histones7,8, and an extra-terminal domain that enables interaction with other proteins, including transcription factors and co-activators9–12. BRD2, BRD3 and BRD4 are BET family proteins that are ubiquitously expressed and have unique functions in development. To investigate whether BRD3 puncta are phase-separated condensates, we first asked if BRD3 forms condensates in live cells. We used the CRISPR/Cas system to insert mEGFP cDNA into the 5′ end of the endogenous BRD3 gene (Extended Data Figure 4B and 4C). These findings demonstrate that each BET protein forms nuclear condensates in definitive endoderm, and the condensates formed by BRD3 are distinct from those formed by BRD2 and BRD4. A titration of sodium chloride (NaCl) showed that BRD3 forms droplets at concentrations as high as 300 mM (Figure 4B). To confirm that in vitro formation of BRD3 droplets is not uniquely observed in the presence of the macromolecular crowding agent polyethylene glycol (10% PEG-8000), we tested the formation of droplets in the presence of three other crowding agents: PEG-6000 (10%), Ficoll 400 (10%) and bovine serum albumin (BSA, 15%) (Extended Data Figure 4F). We synthesized Cy3-labeled DIGIT (Extended Data Figure 4G) and induced in vitro formation of BRD3 droplets in the presence of Cy3-DIGIT. We observed that the Cy3-DIGIT molecules were concentrated within BRD3 droplets (Figure 4C), while Cy3-DIGIT molecules alone remain dispersed (Figure 4C, far right), suggesting that BRD3 forms phase-separated condensates that contain DIGIT in vitro.Titration of BRD3 in a low concentration of crowding agent (1.5% PEG-6000) and in the presence of in vitro transcribed DIGIT showed the formation of BRD3 droplets at 0.5 μM (Figure 4D), a concentration at which BRD3 droplets do not form on their own (Figure 4A). The equivalent intensity of droplet formation was not observed under these conditions until a BRD3 concentration of greater than 1 μM in the presence of SCRM or in the absence of RNA (Figure 4D). Different functions of BET proteins in ESCs are associated with different patterns of genome occupancy, where BRD4 is enriched at enhancers, while BRD2 and BRD3 are enriched at promoters15. The long isoform of BRD3 also shows slightly weaker binding to H4K20ac and H2AK13ac and the short isoform to H4K8ac and H4K20ac (Figure 6B and Extended Data Figure 6B). To evaluate the interaction between H3K18ac and BRD3 further, we asked if H3K18ac affects BRD3 occupancy at known target genes. 