I intentionally reflect on my methodological process and the steps I need to follow so all my analytic methods are rigorous (Table 2). She eats lunch in the dining room from 11:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. and then returns home. I iteratively move between the two data types: the record of Anne’s experience and the sensor data from the night of March 2, 2017. I iteratively move between the two data types: the record of Anne’s experience and the sensor data from the night of March 2, 2017. I iteratively move between the two data types: the record of Anne’s experience and the sensor data from the night of March 2, 2017. I note she spends time in the recliner watching television and naps between 7:48 p.m. and 8:16 p.m. (sensors were almost completely quiet—not activated by movement—during this time): I see this sequential order of movement in the sensor data and make note of when she went to the living room followed by multiple trips to the bathroom, kitchen, and back to the living room where she rested (but did not sleep) in her recliner. Based on our experiences, we think that using qualitative descriptive methods to provide ground truth adds consistency and rigor when training intelligent machines. Based on our experiences, we think that using qualitative descriptive methods to provide ground truth adds consistency and rigor when training intelligent machines. Based on our experiences, we think that using qualitative descriptive methods to provide ground truth adds consistency and rigor when training intelligent machines. Based on our experiences, we think that using qualitative descriptive methods to provide ground truth adds consistency and rigor when training intelligent machines. Consistency and rigor are important because these machines rely on accurate interpretations in order to become capable of intentional performance. Consistency and rigor are important because these machines rely on accurate interpretations in order to become capable of intentional performance. A supervised approach to training the algorithm includes setting clear rules that the computer must follow. The primary author then introduces the Fritz Method, a process for using qualitative descriptive methods to interpret quantifiable big data for annotating ground truth, and reflects on her process as she tells the story of an older adult experiencing RLS using both qualitative data and sensor-based data. Expert-guided supervised learning techniques result in more robust and efficacious algorithms. Expert-guided supervised learning techniques result in more robust and efficacious algorithms. The research project associated with this methodological illustration was approved by the Washington State University Institutional Review Board. This limits our ability to compare the rigor of our interpretations with other teams. These discoveries could lead to more efficacious technology-enabled health-assistive devices. These discoveries could lead to more efficacious technology-enabled health-assistive devices. It should also include community stakeholders (e.g., senior living industry, retirement communities). Qualitative methodologists and clinicians from any social science discipline can have a significant impact on the development of intelligent technology. Qualitative methodologists and clinicians from any social science discipline can have a significant impact on the development of intelligent technology. Smart homes use a variety of sensors along with computer algorithms to continuously monitor older adults’ activities of daily living, and over time, learn their routines and behaviors. Monitoring functional decline is important because falls related to functional decline may result in emergency department visits (Dermody et al , 2017), and subsequent hospital admissions which are costly (Hines et al , 2014; World Health Organization, 2018). The floorplan of the home and the resident’s use of the space within the home determine the location, quantity, and type of sensors that are deployed (Fritz & Dermody, 2018). Sensor timestamps allow tracking of a resident’s sequential movement throughout the home. Knowledge impacts the development of a system (Motta et al , 1989). Effective systems rely on human abilities for gleaning, processing, and filtering information so the system can be trained to emulate the decision-making of a human expert, and act intentionally (Jackson, 1998; Russell & Norvig, 2003). To begin, clinicians must learn about smart home sensors and their data types (characteristics, limitations, and benefits). Additionally, computer scientists must learn about health conditions and the human response to those conditions, and how that response may influence activity and behavior patterns. A shared responsibility exists for each scientific discipline to gain a certain level of comfort with each other’s knowledge domain. Health experiences are captured through weekly nursing interviews using semi-structured questions that regard health or status changes in the preceding 7 days. When an event has occurred (e.g., a fall, an episode of RLS), in addition to describing the activities the resident was engaging in around the time of the event, we observe the naturalistic setting in which the health event occurred (i.e., the home). For the AI agent to act upon changes (i.e. Health technologies are designed to assist with solving real-world health problems that humans experience. To explicate the role of contextualized qualitative data, one must first understand the characteristics of sensor-based data.Quantitative smart home data.In developing a smart home AI agent, quantitative data are subject to computational analysis and are, in their original form, a string of alphanumeric characters (e.g., a single line of data looks like “2019-02-08 00:24:24.700575 BedroomAArea ON”; for multiple lines of data see Figure 2). Data from the semi-structured clinical interview and clinician assessment of the body and psychosocial systems represent smart home residents’ experiences with their daily routines, and health and independence. Data from the semi-structured clinical interview and clinician assessment of the body and psychosocial systems represent smart home residents’ experiences with their daily routines, and health and independence. As such, the development of these technologies requires situational, naturalistic knowledge along with the strongest possible phenomenological explanation to ensure the technology can meet the human’s health needs. In this section, the primary author and creator of the Fritz Method describes in first person her process for applying qualitative descriptive methods when analyzing and contextualizing historic smart home sensor data. Anne lives in a 600 square foot single bedroom, single bath, open floorplan apartment (Figure 1, Left). In my mind I acknowledge her interest in participating in the study and her desire to fulfill, what appears to be, a personal need to continue giving back to society. 