Furthermore, reduced performance in the DS-B (testing working memory) was correlated with the severity of self-reported depressive symptoms as measured by the BDI-2 (r = −0.53; p = 0.019). Furthermore, reduced performance in the DS-B (testing working memory) was correlated with the severity of self-reported depressive symptoms as measured by the BDI-2 (r = −0.53; p = 0.019). Furthermore, reduced performance in the DS-B (testing working memory) was correlated with the severity of self-reported depressive symptoms as measured by the BDI-2 (r = −0.53; p = 0.019). This indicates that patient who suffered from a recurrent depressive episode and those who reported increased symptom severity had more severe working memory deficits. 3.6.Identifying clusters of patientsWhile the results above were based on correlating psychomotor and cognitive measurements over patients, the final exploratory analysis was based on the correlation between patients over all obtained scores. The clustering seemed thus not a mere reflection of age, education, clinical status or quantity of medication. 6 patients were treated with rather sedating Tetracyclic (TeCA) or Tricyclic antidepressants (TCA), more precisely 4 patients received Mirtazapine (ADD: 21 mg) and 2 patients Trimipramine (ADD: 50 mg). 6 patients were treated with rather sedating Tetracyclic (TeCA) or Tricyclic antidepressants (TCA), more precisely 4 patients received Mirtazapine (ADD: 21 mg) and 2 patients Trimipramine (ADD: 50 mg). Importantly, there was no statistical association between subgroups and any type of medication (Fischer’s exact test, SNRI/SSRI: p = 1; TeCA/TCA: p = 0.122; Antipsychotics: p = 1; Anticonvulsants: p = 1; Hypnotics: p = 0.521).When analyzing the statistical relationship between medication and test results, no association was found between medication and performance in the motor paradigm. TeCAs/TCAs prescription correlated negatively with finger tapping (r = −0.46; p = 0.044) and positively with pointing performance (r = 0.52; p = 0.019) suggesting slower basic motor speed and coordination with TeCAs/TCAs treatment in 6 patients. Finally, administration of typical or atypical antipsychotics correlated positively with both trail making test scores (A: r = 0.66; p = 0.001; B: r = 0.57; p = 0.009) and negatively with DS-B (r = −0.45; p = 0.044). This suggests that antipsychotic treatment affected cognitive functioning, i.e., attention and working memory in 6 patients. This suggests that antipsychotic treatment affected cognitive functioning, i.e., attention and working memory in 6 patients. This suggests that antipsychotic treatment affected cognitive functioning, i.e., attention and working memory in 6 patients. A data-driven clustering approach revealed a tendency towards two distinct subgroups. It has been shown that with this medication finger tapping performance does not differ from healthy controls [46] and even that psychomotor functioning generally ameliorated significantly with SSRI treatment [47,48]. In line with this interpretation are several studies associating the very same areas with internal selection and initiation of movements in the healthy brain [54–57]). Accordingly, Rogers [22] reported marked deficits specifically in response selection in depressed patients with melancholic features. According to Schrijvers [13], this association between clinical state and PMD is primarily observed in melancholic depression. Finally, a cluster analysis revealed two subclusters of PMD in our patient sample. Based on these considerations, the aim of the current study was now to delineate PMD for internally vs. externally driven response selection and initiation as aspect of (fine) motor control in major depression. Depressive symptom severity was diagnosed with the ICD-10 and the German version of the revised Beck Depression Inventory-2 [BDI-2 [35]]. Any comorbid psychiatric or neurological diseases including alcohol or drug abuse was an exclusion criterion. As we did not introduce an age limit in order to also include older patients, we screened for dementia using the Mini Mental State Examination [MMSE (Folstein [37]] with a cut-off at 23. Benzodiazepine medication was an exclusion criteria, because it is well known to induce cognitive and psychomotor impairments [38]. Socio-economic status was assessed using a structured interview. All subjects including healthy controls gave informed written consent to the study protocol, which had been approved by the local ethic committee of the RWTH Aachen University Hospital. These non-affective symptoms may severely impact on patients’ psychosocial functioning [3–5] but also pose challenges to treatment regimens that requite active participation of the patient, in particular psychotherapeutic intervention. Subjects had to react as fast as possible to a single-headed arrow pointing to the left or right by pressing the corresponding button. Subjects had to react as fast as possible to a single-headed arrow pointing to the left or right by pressing the corresponding button. The experiment consisted of 2 × 12 blocks of conditions, and lasted approximately 33 min. The experiment consisted of 2 × 12 blocks of conditions, and lasted approximately 33 min. For each condition 8 blocks of 60 s duration were presented in sequences of either 1 (‘Free’)–2 (‘Choice’)–3 (‘Reactive’) or 1–3–2 in the same pseudo-randomized order. For each condition 8 blocks of 60 s duration were presented in sequences of either 1 (‘Free’)–2 (‘Choice’)–3 (‘Reactive’) or 1–3–2 in the same pseudo-randomized order. Subjects were instructed to perform the movements as quickly and accurately as possible in three trials of 10 back-and-forth pointing movements. Subjects were instructed to perform the movements as quickly and accurately as possible in three trials of 10 back-and-forth pointing movements. The task consisted in making one actual word among four pseudo-words with increasing difficulty without time limitation. This non-parametric test was chosen as data (in particular the raw test-scores) did not fulfill the criteria for parametric testing, i.e., normal distribution. Due to their greater robustness against outliers, medians rather than means of test scores and measured values are reported. In case of psychomotor symptoms, however, the relation to depression severity remains in question [11]. In case of psychomotor symptoms, however, the relation to depression severity remains in question [11]. The fact that task performance, as indicated by error rates, was clearly not different between groups indicated that this slowing did not reflect a speed-accuracy-tradeoff. 