So I think that’s one part that has prevented me, personally, in just preceding with the question, “Do you need an interpreter? They prefer a live interpreter” (MA 1).Providers wanted in-person PMIs to be always available. They prefer a live interpreter” (MA 1).Providers wanted in-person PMIs to be always available. There is somebody that is always going to help you with your need. PC provider had 12.7 times the odds of responding favorably to this question post-implementation compared to UCC providers, even after controlling for pre-implementation survey responses to the same question (p = 0.005). For this question, PC providers had 7.6 times the odds of responding favorably post-implementation compared to UCC providers after controlling for pre-implementation survey responses to the same question (p = 0.007). Most others, however, valued any efforts to save even a few minutes of time. “Getting the support that you need meaning, if we’re short of staff and you want this service to work, then you have to help us out so we can help you out” (MA 5). “Getting the support that you need meaning, if we’re short of staff and you want this service to work, then you have to help us out so we can help you out” (MA 5). While the positive changes in PC provider responses to survey questions about communication cannot definitively be attributed to the protocol, we did not see similar improvement in UCC provider responses. While the positive changes in PC provider responses to survey questions about communication cannot definitively be attributed to the protocol, we did not see similar improvement in UCC provider responses. Part of this uncertainty likely relates to providers’ limited experiences having interpreters on the phone; they did not have enough evidence from their own experiences to feel strongly about the protocol’s continuation. We also identified several new themes worth further discussion. Though changing telephones may seem like a trivial change, it had a profound impact on the clinics in this study and this impact has important implications for health systems. Though prior research has been performed on the topic of physician culture and behavior [56–59], little is known about the professional culture of Medical Assistants, the individuals who performed the intervention. English proficiency can be hard to put into categories since it can fall anywhere on a spectrum from no English to fluent English. English proficiency can be hard to put into categories since it can fall anywhere on a spectrum from no English to fluent English. English proficiency can be hard to put into categories since it can fall anywhere on a spectrum from no English to fluent English. Determining where a patient falls on that spectrum is not an easy task and requires a judgment call on the part of both the patient and the individual performing the assessment. Determining where a patient falls on that spectrum is not an easy task and requires a judgment call on the part of both the patient and the individual performing the assessment. Determining where a patient falls on that spectrum is not an easy task and requires a judgment call on the part of both the patient and the individual performing the assessment. Determining where a patient falls on that spectrum is not an easy task and requires a judgment call on the part of both the patient and the individual performing the assessment. Further, determining how much English is sufficient for a particular medical encounter takes the complexity a level further and adds a second degree of judgment to language assessment. This may play an especially important role for MAs given their cultural diversity [68, 69]. “Overcoming gaps in power and status” can be one of the greatest challenges facing organizations transforming MAs into clinical leadership roles [71]. Third, we are unable to quantify the change in frequency of PMI use as a result of the intervention. First, any health system changes with the potential to impact patient care should be carefully implemented with special attention to anticipating and minimizing potential challenges and consequences. Setting and ParticipantsThe study was conducted in six primary care clinics at an urban safety net hospital; two clinics were used as pilot clinics (PC) and four clinics as usual care clinics (UCC). Assignment of the clinics to usual care clinic (UCC) or pilot clinic (PC) was based on agreement of practice managers, which was based on whether the intervention would conflict with other newly implemented programs taking place in some of the clinics (e.g., behavioral health screening). Interviews lasted 20 min and were performed by a physician (JM) with experience working in the clinics.Written informed consent was obtained in-person before all interviews. We analyzed the qualitative interviews using a modified grounded theory approach. Two coders (JM and DW) coded all interviews using data-driven codes [46], met to review coding and establish agreement, and then each coded the remainder of the interviews independently. We also examined the association between providers in PCs versus UCCs and favorable post-implementation survey responses (i.e., answers of “Completely Agree” or “Somewhat Agree”). Specifically, we performed adjusted logistic regression analyses for each survey question, testing models that examined whether practicing in a PC versus UCC was an independent predictor of favorable post-implementation survey responses, controlling for pre-implementation survey responses to the same question.This project was approved by the Boston University Medical Center Internal Review Board. We received surveys from 21 (95%) PC and 40 (87%) UCC providers pre-implementation, and 19 (86%) PC and 37 (80%) UCC providers post-implementation. Barriers and Facilitators to ImplementationWe identified eight themes regarding barriers and facilitators to implementation of the program that we categorized into the PARiHS framework domains of Context, Evidence, and Facilitation [47]. Barriers and Facilitators to ImplementationWe identified eight themes regarding barriers and facilitators to implementation of the program that we categorized into the PARiHS framework domains of Context, Evidence, and Facilitation [47]. This transition was unrelated to the current project, but its negative impact was an important theme discussed by nearly every participant.First, the new phones had problems with the volume and with the speakerphone. Established Teams, Roles, and WorkflowsProviders and MAs described high-functioning clinical teams, with established roles, relationships, and workflows for team members. Several MAs felt they could easily adapt routines to incorporate the new workflow: “But I think if you know how to manage your time, you’ll be okay…It becomes like second nature to you” (MA 2). It was therefore difficult for MAs to add additional, time-sensitive tasks to their workflows.Providers felt pressured to stay on time and many had a tendency to run late. Engagement in Language ScreeningMAs infrequently used the provided language screening questions. Engagement in Language ScreeningMAs infrequently used the provided language screening questions. 