The lack of enhancement of G’ with the addition of casein to P25 (which was seen with P18) could be due to that effect having been maximized. The latter would provide the opportunity for relatively hydrophobic drugs to partition into them, potentially extending the duration of release. Reverse thermal gelation has been useful in a variety of drug delivery applications (5–7). In that context, it is worth noting that, for example, bupivacaine has an aromatic group and a tertiary amine. Protonation of the tertiary amine confers water solubility and interaction with anionic surfaces, while the aromatic group imparts the ability to partition into hydrophobic domains of drug delivery systems or biological systems (e.g. If micelle formation is determined by the amount of casein available in each system (22), the number of mixed micelles formed should be similar at a given casein concentration, and might not vary between the two concentrations of P18 and P25. Bioadhesion is important to ensure retention at the site of application, improving patient compliance (19). While the fact that there was no tissue reaction whatsoever within the 6h is somewhat reassuring, it cannot preclude the possibility of tissue reaction with more extended exposure. The addition of casein to P407 increased its adhesiveness, mechanical strength and viscosity, and slowed the release rates of the model drugs. Measurements were performed at a temperature range from 10 to 45 °C using linear oscillatory shear rheology measurements (100 rads−1, 1% strain, and 1°C/min) and 25mm parallel plate, Peltier plate steel (105100), a sample volume of 350 μL, a gap between the plates of 0.300 mm. Portions of porcine tissue (epidermis/dermis) were fixed horizontally to the lower end of the analytical probe (P/10) using double-sided adhesive tape and suture, respectively. In TPA mode, the analytical probe descended on the surface of each formulation at a constant rate of 0.5 mm/s, penetrated 10 mm in the formulation and a downward tensile force of 2.45 N was applied at fixated time of 90s. Drug ReleaseThe release of sulforhodamine B, bupivacaine hydrochloride from each formulation was performed using a diffusion system. With topical applications, being able to improve the properties of the hydrogel, such as adhesiveness and viscosity, would make it easier for the formulation to remain in contact with the skin, particularly in places that are relatively difficult to access or with high friction (e.g. Filter inserts (donor compartments) with formed gels were suspended in wells (acceptor compartments) filled with pre-warmed phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) pH 7.4, and the plates were then incubated in an oven (37°C). In order to prevent animals from rubbing the hydrogel off their skin, these experiments were performed under isoflurane anesthesia. Drug releaseRelease kinetics from the hydrogel was assessed with sulforhodamine B (logP = 1.25; ChemAxon Database) and bupivacaine hydrochloride (log P = 3.71 at pH 7; (ChemAxon Database). At predetermined intervals, aliquots of the PBS (the receiving media) were collected and inserts moved into a new well with fresh PBS.In the absence of casein, there was little difference in the release rates of sulforhodamine B (Fig.5) or bupivacaine (Fig. After 6h, animals were euthanized, and skin samples were collected, and processed into hematoxylin and eosin-stained slides. After 6h, animals were euthanized, and skin samples were collected, and processed into hematoxylin and eosin-stained slides. 