For additional information related to selection of mice, number of mice cohort tested in independent experiments, and other details, see Supplemental Methods and Materials. Behavior took place at the same time during the day cycle, with control and experimental mice tested together each time, rotating between groups to counterbalance for order effects. For details on locomotor/open field, elevated plus maze, sucrose consumption test, forced swim test, and accelerating rotarod test, see Supplemental Methods and Materials. For details on locomotor/open field, elevated plus maze, sucrose consumption test, forced swim test, and accelerating rotarod test, see Supplemental Methods and Materials. In addition, there was a trend toward significance on the distance traveled in the center (p = .08), such that knockout animals traveled approximately half of the distance measured in wild-type control animals within the center; however, these two groups did not differ on distance traveled in the perimeter of the open field (F = 1.768, p > .05) (Figure 1G). FGF2 is a potent growth factor that regulates stem cell maintenance and neurogenesis both during embryonic development and in response to challenges such as stress or injury in the adult brain (1–6). FGF2 is a potent growth factor that regulates stem cell maintenance and neurogenesis both during embryonic development and in response to challenges such as stress or injury in the adult brain (1–6). Previous work has shown that there is an age-related increase in localization of GR on glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP)+ cells instead of neurons (28); however, co-staining with GFAP showed no differences in the percentages of GFAP+ cells that were also GRir throughout the hippocampus (wild-type = 19.15% ± 5.3; Fgf2 knockout = 17.07% ± 3.9). Total numbers of hippocampal GRir cells were significantly and positively correlated to both of these anxiety measures across all animals (Table 2), suggesting that decreased levels of hippocampal GR are associated with the increased anxiety behavior in mice.To better characterize HPA axis activity in the Fgf2 KO animals, we examined GR and corticotropin releasing hormone (CRH) ir cells within the paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus (PVN), which contains the CRH cell bodies important for the hypothalamic regulation of the HPA axis. Finally, because the central nucleus of the amygdala contains CRH cell bodies and regulates the HPA axis, we examined amygdalar CRHir. Together, the data suggest that FGF2 is crucial for maintenance of GR expression in differentiated neurons of the hippocampus, which, in turn, affects CRH protein expression within neurons of the PVN but not in the amygdala, consistent with the inhibitory role of the hippocampus on the HPA axis.Corticosterone Responsivity.Previous studies have shown that the profile observed in the current phenotype of Fgf2 KO mice, i.e., decreased hippocampal GR expression together with increases in PVN CRH, is associated with increased corticosterone response to an anxiogenic stimulus (29). Adult Rescue of Fgf2 KO Mouse Anxiety PhenotypeWhile we have observed a strong anxiety phenotype in response to the Fgf2 gene deletion, it remains to be determined whether this is due to irreversible developmental events consequential to the absence of Fgf2 or whether the FGF2 ligand itself is involved in the expression of anxiety behavior. Therefore, we performed a rescue experiment by administering either vehicle or FGF2 ligand daily for 1 week to adult Fgf2 KO or wild-type control mice and then assessing anxiety behavior, hippocampal GR levels, and circulating baseline corticosterone levels.Behavior.Adult male wild-type mice and Fgf2 KO mice were injected daily for 7 days with vehicle or FGF2 (see timeline, Figure 3A) and then tested on the elevated plus maze, open field test, and forced swim test. No effect of FGF2 treatment on anxiety behavior was seen in control wild-type mice (EPM: F = 0.003, p > .05; open field: F = 6.849E-5, p > .05) (Figure 3B, C). RU486 also showed a paradoxical anxiolytic effect in Fgf2 KO, vehicle-injected mice, although this was variable and did not reach statistical significance (F = 2.379, p > .15) (Figure 4E, F).Role of Fgfr in Anxiety Behavior.To ascertain if FGFRs are necessary for changes in anxiety behavior, we examined mice that conditionally lacked Fgfr1, Fgfr2, or both receptors in the dorsal forebrain. The hippocampus, which contains high concentrations of GR, is thought to be a crucial link in the negative feedback regulation of the HPA axis (24,25,32) (Figure 2A). The hippocampus, which contains high concentrations of GR, is thought to be a crucial link in the negative feedback regulation of the HPA axis (24,25,32) (Figure 2A). However, while increases in amygdalar GR may also play a contributory role to the increased HPA axis activity observed in Fgf2 KO mice, amygdalar GR changes were not affected by adult FGF2 rescue administration, suggesting that GR changes in the amygdala are not crucial for the anxiolytic action of FGF2 in adulthood. 