The risk of death in the cured state is obtained from standard U.S. life tables and is dependent on the patient’s age. We assumed that cancer carries an additional cancer-specific risk of death. In the probabilistic parameter sampling (PSA) we simulated each intervention’s outcome for 10,000 hypothetical cohorts. For example, in the first simulation, only the value of the first parameter is equal to its LB, but the rest of the parameters are equal to their mean values. In the second simulation the first parameter is changed to its UB. One-factor-at-a-time design only explores the change in one parameter at a time.In PSA, each simulation represents a hypothetical cohort. One-factor-at-a-time design only explores the change in one parameter at a time.In PSA, each simulation represents a hypothetical cohort. In addition, we performed further regressions to compare the results from the PSA with the one-factor-at-a-time and full-factorial designs. For example changing the cost of chemotherapy by $1 does not have a noticeable impact on the NHB of chemotherapy. However, computing EVPI can be challenging.5 Thus, no single measure of sensitivity analyses is perfect and decision analysts often are encouraged to perform a combination of deterministic and probabilistic sensitivity analyses.6 Furthermore, if our uncertainty regarding the chance of failing chemotherapy changes from zero to one, then we expect an increase in the cost of chemotherapy by nearly $36,000, and a reduction in the benefit by 7 QALYs. The coefficients of the probabilities can be interpreted in a similar way. For example, the uncertainty in the mortality rate of cancer (μCancer) has the most important impact on the NHB of chemotherapy followed by the probability of failing chemotherapy (pFailChemo) and the cost of chemotherapy (cChemo). Notice that the main effects and the intercept are similar to Table 2. The metamodel’s intercept reproduced the base-case results extremely well confirming that the effects were locally near-linear. For example, chemotherapy is preferred to radiation as long as the annual cost of chemotherapy (cChemo) is less than $36K (7.8 SD) while holding the other parameters at their means. Obviously, the cost of chemotherapy should not have a direct impact on the choice between radiation and surgery. For example chemotherapy is the optimal choice when chemotherapy is preferred over radiation where Sixteen scenarios were used in the metamodeling of the one-factor-at-a-time design, 256 were used in the metamodeling of the full-factorial design, and 10,000 scenarios were used in the metamodeling of the PSA design. We illustrated this approach with a simplified example that involves treating case patients with chemotherapy, radiation or surgery. We illustrated this approach with a simplified example that involves treating case patients with chemotherapy, radiation or surgery. Traditional deterministic sensitivity analyses vary one or two parameters and hold the rest of the parameters at their mean values. We compared the results from the PSA design to two types of deterministic designs: a full-factorial (2K) and a one-factor-at-a-time design. As a result, we expect an interaction between these two parameters. In addition, higher level interactions (e.g., three-way interaction) are generally considered unimportant.10 Validation is an important step following metamodel specification.18 Validation is especially important when metamodels are used to replace computationally costly models (e.g., output prediction in what-if scenarios, and optimization). However, the other coefficients denote the change in outcome due to percent change in the parameters from their mean values. However, the other coefficients denote the change in outcome due to percent change in the parameters from their mean values. However, we would argue that simplicity may outweigh detail in the current presentation of CEA results. In these fields, metamodeling is commonly used for prediction (i.e., to replace the simulation model). Although, model replacement continues to be a valid application of metamodeling, it is not the focus of our study. Linear approximation may become problematic when a high level of accuracy is desired in a non-linear model. Linear approximation may become problematic when a high level of accuracy is desired in a non-linear model. When the purpose of a metamodel is model replacement (e.g., to perform quick what-if scenarios and reduce computing cost), lack-of-fit statistics (e.g., F-statistics) and cross-validation methods are more popular.18,19 We recommend using metamodeling as the first step of sensitivity analyses in economic evaluation. We illustrate our approach using a simplified cancer-cure model. We illustrate our approach using a simplified cancer-cure model. While mathematically sound, an analyst may be more interested in presenting the base-case outcomes when the parameters are equal to their mean values. While mathematically sound, an analyst may be more interested in presenting the base-case outcomes when the parameters are equal to their mean values. where β0 is the new intercept, β1 and β2 are the coefficients of the standardized parameters z1 and z2, respectively, and u is the new residual term.The intercept β0 is equal to the base-case outcome when all the parameters are set equal to their mean values. where ΔE and ΔC are the incremental benefit and incremental cost respectively of T1 relative to T0. All three expressions (Δθj, Δγj and Δδj/λ) are measured in units of health (e.g., quality adjusted life years, QALYs). All three expressions (Δθj, Δγj and Δδj/λ) are measured in units of health (e.g., quality adjusted life years, QALYs). However, if Δθj is a negative value, then T1 must be preferred over T0 in regions where zj<zj*.To present the threshold values on their original scales: Adding an interaction (cross-product) term to Equation (8), and redefining the relationship as an inequality produces: where Δθ3 is the coefficient of the interaction term z1z2. This coefficient can also be interpreted as the additional effect of z2 on ΔNHB when z1 is equal to +1. To compare K interventions, one must re-compute this constraint for all K(K − 1)/2 intervention pairs possible. If treatment fails after this period, the patient stays in the cancer state with an increased risk of death. If treatment fails after this period, the patient stays in the cancer state with an increased risk of death. 