5) and the presence of dementia (Mosimann et al  2005), suggesting that it might prove to be a useful marker of disease progression—perhaps in particular of cognitive decline. 5) and the presence of dementia (Mosimann et al  2005), suggesting that it might prove to be a useful marker of disease progression—perhaps in particular of cognitive decline. 5) and the presence of dementia (Mosimann et al  2005), suggesting that it might prove to be a useful marker of disease progression—perhaps in particular of cognitive decline. 5) and the presence of dementia (Mosimann et al  2005), suggesting that it might prove to be a useful marker of disease progression—perhaps in particular of cognitive decline. Since ‘reflexive’ saccadic latency seems to be most prolonged by a combination of cortical and subcortical pathology rather than either in isolation (Mosimann et al  2005), one might speculate that analysis of saccadic latency distributions will turn out to be a particularly sensitive biomarker of the onset and progression of cognitive defects and dementia within a PD population (Foltynie et al  2004a), and might enable the disease progression to be described according to the LATER decision model. It has been suggested that as the supply of dopamine becomes limited it affects fast reaction times first, then as the levels fall further slower reaction times become affected (Robbins and Brown 1990). It is possible that in our study the l-dopa taken by patients with relatively mild PD may overdose some dopaminergic networks in the brain, exceeding an optimal threshold and resulting in poorer performance (see below).There are relatively few published studies specifically addressing the effect of dopamine on saccadic reaction times, and a number of methodological concerns hinders their interpretation: the use of different testing procedures, failure to counterbalance ‘on’ and ‘off’ order of testing, different medication and withdrawal regimes, and so on (reviewed critically by Harrison et al  1995). The site of action of dopamineThe ultimate brain region influenced by l-dopa in this instance is not known, but an appealing candidate is the frontal eye fields, where the firing rate of single neurons in the monkey show rise-to-threshold behaviour in advance of a saccade that correspond closely with LATER's decision signal (Hanes and Schall 1996). This distributional analysis then allows one to focus on the largely cortical factors that influence the neural decision to move, as opposed to those parameters (velocity and amplitude) of the movement itself, which are very stereotyped and essentially determined in the brainstem (Carpenter 2000). Here, however, although there are cells within the frontal eye fields that seem to represent a saccadic decision, this area (Brodmann area 8) is closest to the dorsal stream (Brodmann areas 9, 46), and the slowing of saccadic latencies in response to l-dopa is unlikely to be explained by this hypothesis.However, the relationship between prefrontal and nigrostriatal dopamine levels is complex such that in early PD the midbrain dopamine deficiency is accompanied by a more generalised prefrontal excess of dopamine. Here, however, although there are cells within the frontal eye fields that seem to represent a saccadic decision, this area (Brodmann area 8) is closest to the dorsal stream (Brodmann areas 9, 46), and the slowing of saccadic latencies in response to l-dopa is unlikely to be explained by this hypothesis.However, the relationship between prefrontal and nigrostriatal dopamine levels is complex such that in early PD the midbrain dopamine deficiency is accompanied by a more generalised prefrontal excess of dopamine. The effect on reaction times seems to be dependent on the testing paradigm (simple ‘reflexive’ reaction time versus ‘voluntary’ or choice reaction time), and the dopaminergic tone, which in turn depends on the severity of PD, the dose of replacement therapy and the timing of subsequent testing. While it is acknowledged that more complex ‘voluntary’ saccades (for example, antisaccades or memory-guided saccades) may permit a better separation of PD and control groups, such paradigms were not chosen here in the interests of speed and simplicity. Secondly, and perhaps most interestingly, the effects of l-dopa on reaction time and the decision process with reference to current concepts of the role of dopamine on neural function. High contrast red target dots were generated from three low-powered lasers that form part of the recording unit. Subjects sat 1.5 m in front of a blank wall, on to which the lasers projected at angles 10° left, 0° or 10° right of centre: to a first approximation these angles are independent of the distance from the subject to the wall. The device is comfortable and requires no particular skill to set up; because the display moves in synchrony with the head, stabilisation of the head is not necessary. ProceduresSubjects were asked to track the movement of the red laser dot as rapidly as they could. Reciprobit plots of saccadic latencySaccadic latency, unlike velocity or duration, appears to be controlled at the cortical level, and is highly and randomly variable from trial to trial. Of particular interest to this study it appears that an increase in the threshold criterion level required before a decision is made results in an anticlockwise swivel of the distribution (Fig. A log likelihood measure of support for the alternative hypotheses of shift versus swivel was thus obtained for each patient, and summed across all patients to provide an overall measure of support for one rather than the other, differences of more than 3 log units being equivalent to a conventional significance criterion of P=0.05. The three parameters that describe the distribution of saccadic latencies in the different groups are presented in Table 3. The current investigation consisted of two parts: a cross-sectional study comparing a heterogeneous population with PD to controls, and an ‘on/off’ l-dopa study conducted on a separate group of patients. In contrast there was, as expected, a very significant improvement in motor UPDRS (t= −7.2, df=13, P<0.001) and Hoehn and Yahr scores (t=−6.5, df=13, P<0.001) in the ‘on’ compared to ‘off’ state as shown in Table 1. Furthermore, we found no correlation between the effect of l-dopa on reciprocal median saccadic latencies (‘on’ minus ‘off’ l-dopa) and either the dose of l-dopa (r= −0.15, P=0.59) or disease severity as assessed by the motor UPDRS ‘on’ score (r=−0.23, P=0.4). Furthermore, in conjunction with the great intersubject variability of saccadic latency that we observed, this finding has important implications for the use of the technique as a biomarker of PD. 