Conversely, women risk the diversion of critical resources by their partner towards other women and their children. Himba women also noted that it was sex, more than love, that was likely to lead to diversion of resources and even divorce. Future studies that focus on a smaller number of populations or look at intra-community variation could utilize more fine-grained variables. Likert scales and forced-choice questions were more familiar to some of our participants than to others. Likert scales and forced-choice questions were more familiar to some of our participants than to others. Likert scales and forced-choice questions were more familiar to some of our participants than to others. Another potential problem with using Likert scales is the possibility that raters will be biased towards extreme responding. Using Likert responses on other types of moral transgressions collected for another study in seven of the populations in our sample, we find no evidence that extreme responding systematically affected our results (Supplementary Fig. Finally, while efforts were made to collect data on a broad swath of each population, we used convenience samples, and as such, they are not necessarily representative of the populations at large. In addition, variation could be the result of sample variation in characteristics such age or marital status. Our results point to the importance of studying universals and variation in conjunction with one another. 10-000238/#10-000253) covering work in Los Angeles, Namibia, China, Japan and India; California State University Fullerton for work in Ecuador (no. 2016-2377) for work in Nicaragua; Arizona State University (no. 00002770) for work in Fiji; University of New Mexico (no. 10-034) for work in Bolivia; University of Washington (no. 46690) for work in Indonesia; and University of Nevada Las Vegas (no. We also aimed to only include cultures that the anthropologist had substantial ethnographic knowledge about their population, as we relied on that knowledge to create culture-level variables. All other interviews were conducted in person by an anthropologist and/or, where necessary, local translators who worked as part of the research team. Most samples were evenly split between men and women and included a large proportion of married individuals (Fig. A five-point Likert scale ranging from ‘very bad’ to ‘very good’ was used to rate each statement. A five-point Likert scale ranging from ‘very bad’ to ‘very good’ was used to rate each statement. Two measures of paternal investment were used: direct care, which measures everyday care and interactions, and paternal provisioning, which included measures of male contribution to subsistence and other resource transfers. On the basis of these values, Akaike weights were also calculated, estimating the relative probability that a given model, out of a specified set, will make the best predictions of future data. Here, we report the results of predictors run individually, but results using a combination of predictors are shown in Supplementary Fig. Full model details are available in the Supplementary Information. Full model details are available in the Supplementary Information. Reporting Summary.Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. This is surprising given that the same evolutionary logic that was used to derive the prediction of a sex difference can be employed to generate predictions about variation. One clear example of this is that the level of paternal investment in a given society is expected to influence both men’s and women’s feelings about infidelity. Therefore, we expect that a female-biased ASR and social norms that are more permissive of extramarital sex will be associated with less severe jealous response. In part two, we presented a replication of the forced-choice vignette originally designed by Buss and colleagues to assess differences in the type of jealousy (emotional and sexual) that is most distressing to men and women21. Another robust trend is that female infidelity is judged more harshly than male infidelity, regardless of type. Another robust trend is that female infidelity is judged more harshly than male infidelity, regardless of type. Another robust trend is that female infidelity is judged more harshly than male infidelity, regardless of type. We found that levels of paternal investment were strongly associated with jealous response to sexual infidelity, but had a smaller and more uncertain effect on respondent’s views of emotional infidelity (Fig. Increased levels of paternal provisioning were associated with harsher views of male sexual infidelity (β = −0.69, 89% PI = −1.24 to −0.16, β(pr < 0) = 97.9%), but not female infidelity (β = −0.30, 89% PI = −0.94 to 0.34, β(pr < 0) = 78.7%) where again the distribution of the predictor overlaps substantially with zero. Next, we modelled the effects of social norms that we expected would be linked to both the level of paternal investment and infidelity, to understand the broader social milieu affecting jealous response. When the three predictor variables were analysed together, we found that the effects of paternal investment were most robust (Supplementary Fig. 3), varying little across the models. In the forced choice, we find robust support for the notion of a universal sex difference, with men being more upset than women by sexual infidelity. This trend has been seen in other work, which shows that outside of the forced-choice paradigm, both sexes find sexual infidelity more distressing22. 