To translocate from the cytoplasm into the nucleus, BAP1 undergoes self-deubiquitylation, such that mutations in the BAP1 catalytic domain result in BAP1 being sequestered in the cytoplasm (5). However, the spontaneous development of mesotheliomas in Bap1+/− mice not exposed to asbestos (65, 66), and the development of multiple cancer types in carriers of BAP1 mutations (Fig. However, the spontaneous development of mesotheliomas in Bap1+/− mice not exposed to asbestos (65, 66), and the development of multiple cancer types in carriers of BAP1 mutations (Fig. The fact that most BAP1-associated cancers arise in middle-age and older individuals, and that the penetrance for any particular cancer type is less than 100%, suggests that genomic aberrations in addition to BAP1 loss are required for cancer formation, for example, mutations in the Gq signaling pathway (68). Surprisingly, DNA methylation analyses found no evidence for epigenetic BAP1 inactivation (78). Surprisingly, DNA methylation analyses found no evidence for epigenetic BAP1 inactivation (78). This was because aCGH missed point mutations and tNGS missed larger deletions (79). This was because aCGH missed point mutations and tNGS missed larger deletions (79). The correct interpretation of BAP1 IHC is critical in cancer diagnosis and also in research; therefore, we will review this issue, which, in our experience, is confusing to many (Fig. Therefore, IHC, which is not a quantitative assay, cannot help to identify carriers of germline BAP1 mutations.As for the cytoplasm, two scenarios are possible. Moreover, negative BAP1 nuclear staining in both epithelioid and spindle cells confirms the diagnosis of biphasic mesothelioma (Fig. The two discordant samples had missense mutations in the catalytic domain (p.Gly13Val and p.Phe170Leu). Overall, the positive and negative predictive values of the IHC test for ccRCC were >95% (20). These results were supported by two independent and parallel studies. The presence of inherited mutations significantly increased median overall survival compared with patients without these mutations (7.9 years vs. 2.4 years, P = 0.001; ref. The presence of inherited mutations significantly increased median overall survival compared with patients without these mutations (7.9 years vs. 2.4 years, P = 0.001; ref. In uveal melanoma, detection of BAP1 mutations directly by sequencing, or indirectly via the class 2 transcriptional signature or other methods, is now a routine part of patient care, with high-risk patients stratified for increased surveillance and clinical trial entry (111–113). BAP1 is a ubiquitin carboxy-terminal hydrolase (UCH), a member of the deubiquitylase (DUB) family of proteins. PBRM1, which encodes a switching defective/sucrose nonfermenting (SWI/SNF) nucleosome remodeling complex protein (BAF180), is inactivated in approximately 50% of ccRCC (20, 116). Numerous ongoing studies are exploring the possibility of targeting BAP1 mutations or using BAP1 status as a biomarker for sensitivity to different therapies.The incorporation of the active metabolite of gemcitabine into DNA causes replication arrest and apoptosis, making this drug one of the most used chemotherapeutic agents against several cancers, including mesothelioma, for which it is approved as second-line treatment (125). Numerous ongoing studies are exploring the possibility of targeting BAP1 mutations or using BAP1 status as a biomarker for sensitivity to different therapies.The incorporation of the active metabolite of gemcitabine into DNA causes replication arrest and apoptosis, making this drug one of the most used chemotherapeutic agents against several cancers, including mesothelioma, for which it is approved as second-line treatment (125). Numerous ongoing studies are exploring the possibility of targeting BAP1 mutations or using BAP1 status as a biomarker for sensitivity to different therapies.The incorporation of the active metabolite of gemcitabine into DNA causes replication arrest and apoptosis, making this drug one of the most used chemotherapeutic agents against several cancers, including mesothelioma, for which it is approved as second-line treatment (125). Numerous ongoing studies are exploring the possibility of targeting BAP1 mutations or using BAP1 status as a biomarker for sensitivity to different therapies.The incorporation of the active metabolite of gemcitabine into DNA causes replication arrest and apoptosis, making this drug one of the most used chemotherapeutic agents against several cancers, including mesothelioma, for which it is approved as second-line treatment (125). Two recent independent studies proposed that BAP1 status may be predictive of sensitivity to gemcitabine. Two recent independent studies proposed that BAP1 status may be predictive of sensitivity to gemcitabine. BAP1 status may equally predict sensitivity to other chemotherapeutic agents that cause DNA damage and cell death.Recently, Webster and colleagues demonstrated that Bap1 loss cooperated with active oncogenic BRAFV600E in supporting melanoma growth in a mouse model. The BAP1-deficient developmental phenotype could be rescued using SAHA or specific depletion of HDAC4. The BAP1-deficient developmental phenotype could be rescued using SAHA or specific depletion of HDAC4. However, very recently Hassan and colleagues reported that BAP1 status does not determine sensitivity to PARP inhibitors in patient-derived mesothelioma cell lines (140). RNA-seq datasets were generated from patients’ RCC as well as from the corresponding tumor implanted orthotopically in mice. RNA-seq datasets were generated from patients’ RCC as well as from the corresponding tumor implanted orthotopically in mice. Comparative analyses were then performed between the patients’ transcriptome, corresponding to tumor and stroma, and the tumorgraft transcriptome, corresponding to the tumor only. BAP1 haploinsufficiency was characterized by a distinct expression profile including genes related to chromatin remodeling, DNA repair, and activation of immune checkpoint receptors, a pattern associated with the inflammatory TME. In addition, depletion or pharmacologic inhibition of EZH2 in BAP1-deficient Xenopus embryos did not rescue a neural crest developmental phenotype (39). Thus, the role of EZH2 inhibitors in BAP1-deficient cancers remains unclear, and the results of a clinical trial on tazemetostat in mesothelioma that has been completed are being evaluated (ref. However, environmental exposure to asbestos was very likely among L family members (14). BAP1 has emerged as a critical regulator of GxE interaction (61). Because BAP1-mutant uveal melanoma does not show strong evidence of DNA damage repair defects or increased mutation burden (148), further work is needed to determine which of the possible functions of BAP1 are relevant to each cancer type in which it is mutated. However, the improved survival predates screening, as it was also observed in family members who were diagnosed before the discovery of the BAP1 cancer syndrome (67). BAP1 mutations may influence the response to immunotherapy by increasing the propensity to chromothripsis, by deregulating the expression of genes that modulate immune checkpoints, and by promoting a proinflammatory tumor microenvironment (62, 141, 145). BAP1 mutations may influence the response to immunotherapy by increasing the propensity to chromothripsis, by deregulating the expression of genes that modulate immune checkpoints, and by promoting a proinflammatory tumor microenvironment (62, 141, 145). BAP1 Nuclear ActivitiesIn the nucleus, BAP1 binds to several proteins (Fig. BAP1 Nuclear ActivitiesIn the nucleus, BAP1 binds to several proteins (Fig. These proteins are assembled in multiprotein complexes that in turn may associate with other tissue-specific transcriptional regulators. These proteins are assembled in multiprotein complexes that in turn may associate with other tissue-specific transcriptional regulators. Moreover, BAP1 is part of a ternary complex bridging FOXK2 and HCF1 and represses FOXK2 target genes, an effect requiring BAP1 DUB activity but not the interaction with HCF1 binding (27).BAP1 binds ASXL1, 2, and 3, human homologs of Drosophila Polycomb group protein ASX, which is an obligate binding partner for the Drosophila BAP1 ortholog Calypso, which catalyzes the monodeubiquitylation of histone H2A at residue K119 (28). However, a recent inter-actome study based on an affinity purification mass spectrometry approach identified neither BRCA1 nor BARD1 in association with BAP1 and the human polycomb complex (3). However, a recent inter-actome study based on an affinity purification mass spectrometry approach identified neither BRCA1 nor BARD1 in association with BAP1 and the human polycomb complex (3). However, a recent inter-actome study based on an affinity purification mass spectrometry approach identified neither BRCA1 nor BARD1 in association with BAP1 and the human polycomb complex (3). However, a recent inter-actome study based on an affinity purification mass spectrometry approach identified neither BRCA1 nor BARD1 in association with BAP1 and the human polycomb complex (3). The increase in mitochondrial Ca2+ concentration triggers the release of cytochrome c that in turn activates apoptosis (33). Using chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing (ChIP-seq) and RNA sequencing (RNA-seq), Zhang and colleagues identified an array of BAP1-targeted genes, many of them associated with metabolism. UPR can be induced by glucose starvation, leading to metabolic stress at the ER that, if not resolved, leads to programmed cell death. Studies in Xenopus revealed that BAP1 is required for the epigenetic switch from pluripotency to differentiation in the ectoderm, mesoderm, and neural crest through its regulation of epigenetic marks, such as histone 3 lysine 27 acetylation (H3K27ac). Moreover, using a genetically engineered inducible Bap1 knockout murine model, it has been demonstrated that the deletion of Bap1 altered several metabolic pathways. Moreover, breast cancers and basal cell carcinomas are also quite frequent and will likely be included among the “core cancers” as more data accumulate (8, 55–57). Following this low exposure, Bap1+/− mice developed mesothelioma at a comparable rate to wild-type mice (Bap1+/+ mice) exposed to ten times higher doses of asbestos (62). 