2, tuning slopes in the combined condition were generally steeper for congruent cells and flatter for opposite cells, as compared to single-cue conditions. Thus, differences in neuronal sensitivity between congruent and opposite cells are due mainly to differences in slope with little contribution from changes in Fano factor. Thus, differences in neuronal sensitivity between congruent and opposite cells are due mainly to differences in slope with little contribution from changes in Fano factor. Examples of model fits are shown in Fig. Examples of model fits are shown in Fig. By recording from single MSTd neurons, we address three important questions. Alternatively, this finding may reflect stronger correlations among congruent cells than opposite cells (see Discussion).If significant CPs reflect a functional linkage between neurons and perception, then more sensitive neurons may show larger CPs. 6b) form a cloud of points that shows a robust negative correlation, suggesting that the difference in CP between congruent and opposite cells may be driven largely by the difference in sensitivity.How does this dependence of bimodal CPs on visual/vestibular congruency arise? 6c, black filled bars). This suggests that, in the visual condition, responses of opposite cells may be decoded relative to their vestibular preference. The analyses summarized above were based on mean firing rates computed from the middle 1s of the 2s stimulus period (containing most of the velocity variation). 8b, solid blue curve) were close to those predicted by theory, with the closest agreement seen during the period of peak discharge (Fig. 8b, solid blue curve) were close to those predicted by theory, with the closest agreement seen during the period of peak discharge (Fig. 8b, solid blue curve) were close to those predicted by theory, with the closest agreement seen during the period of peak discharge (Fig. 8b, solid blue vs. orange curves). 8b, dashed blue vs. orange curves). 8c, solid curves) for all time windows. 8c, dashed curves). The improvement in performance is close to that predicted by optimal cue integration theory, as seen in human studies of multi-sensory integration5,6. The improvement in performance is close to that predicted by optimal cue integration theory, as seen in human studies of multi-sensory integration5,6. The improvement in performance is close to that predicted by optimal cue integration theory, as seen in human studies of multi-sensory integration5,6. These findings suggest that behavior may rely more heavily on congruent cells than opposite cells when both cues are provided. In each trial, the monkey experienced forward motion with a small leftward or rightward component, and made an eye movement to report the perceived direction (Fig 1b, Methods). Neuronal sensitivityWe find that congruent cells show increased sensitivity during cue combination whereas opposite cells show reduced sensitivity. Neuronal sensitivityWe find that congruent cells show increased sensitivity during cue combination whereas opposite cells show reduced sensitivity. Our data show clearly that slopes are increased in the combined condition for congruent cells and reduced for opposite cells (Fig. Thus, improved sensitivity of MSTd neurons under cue combination is not simply a result of greater responses.A reduction in response variance could also contribute to the increased sensitivity of congruent cells. However, Fano factor does not differ substantially between congruent and opposite cells (Fig. Hence the difference in sensitivity between congruent and opposite cells arises primarily from differences in the slope of the response function, and these slope changes are well accounted for by linear weighted summation of single-cue responses. Note, however, that linear combination of perceptual estimates at the level of behavior, as often seen in human studies, does not necessarily imply linear weighted summation at the level of single neurons. Indeed, congruent and opposite cells show comparable linear summation (Fig. 5c), but this produces greater sensitivity for congruent cells and poorer sensitivity for opposite cells. Our current findings show that this relationship holds for both congruent and opposite cells (Suppl. When CPs have been observed previously34,36,38–42, this is the relationship typically seen—stronger firing when the animal reports a preferred stimulus for the neuron. Thus, one possible explanation for our findings is that responses of opposite cells in the visual condition are decoded with respect to their vestibular preference. Why might activity of opposite cells be decoded as evidence in favor of their vestibular, not visual, preference? Why might activity of opposite cells be decoded as evidence in favor of their vestibular, not visual, preference? We initially trained animals to discriminate heading based solely on vestibular cues, and subsequently added the random-dot stimuli and gradually increased motion coherence until thresholds in the combined condition were reduced relative to the vestibular condition. This may be sensible given that congruent cells are substantially more sensitive than opposite cells under cue combination (Fig. This may be sensible given that congruent cells are substantially more sensitive than opposite cells under cue combination (Fig. This may be sensible given that congruent cells are substantially more sensitive than opposite cells under cue combination (Fig. Similar negative correlations between CPs and neuronal thresholds have been observed in other studies34,36,41–43. We examined this possibility by computing noise correlations between single-unit and multi-unit activity recorded from the same electrode, as these noise correlations have been reported to be predictive of significant CPs39. Future experiments can probe for causal links between MSTd neurons and heading perception during cue integration and can test whether neurons change their weighting of visual and vestibular cues dynamically as the reliability of cues varies. In each trial, the monkey experienced forward motion with a small leftward or rightward component (angle α, Fig 1a). At the end of the 2s trial, the fixation spot disappeared, two choice targets appeared, and the monkey made a saccade to one of the targets to report his perceived motion as leftward or rightward relative to straight ahead (Fig. All animal procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Washington University and were in accordance with National Institutes of Health guidelines.The experiment consisted of three randomly-interleaved stimulus conditions: (1) In the Vestibular condition, the monkey was translated by the motion platform while fixating a head-fixed target on a blank screen. Data analysisTo quantify behavioral performance, we plotted the proportion of 'rightward' decisions as a function of heading (Fig. Data analysisTo quantify behavioral performance, we plotted the proportion of 'rightward' decisions as a function of heading (Fig. Note that CI reflects both the congruency of tuning and the steepness of the slopes of the tuning curves around straight ahead. CI was considered to be significantly different from zero when both of the constituent R values were significant (p < 0.05). The average threshold measured in the combined condition (2.1±0.06°, Fig. The average threshold measured in the combined condition (2.1±0.06°, Fig. Multisensory integration in human behavior often follows predictions of a quantitative framework that applies Bayesian statistical inference to the problem of cue integration8–10. These data suggest that monkeys, like humans, can combine multiple sensory cues near optimally to improve perceptual performance. We computed neuronal thresholds from the standard deviation of the best-fitting cumulative Gaussian functions (Fig. We computed neuronal thresholds from the standard deviation of the best-fitting cumulative Gaussian functions (Fig. 2e, compare black triangles to white circles and gray squares). 2c), opposite cells typically became less sensitive (Fig. The CI will be near +1 when visual and vestibular tuning functions have a consistent slope (Fig. The CI will be near +1 when visual and vestibular tuning functions have a consistent slope (Fig. 