Data were weighted to account for unequal probabilities of selection and both facility and patient nonresponse. In accordance with the federal human subjects protection regulations at 45 Code of Federal Regulations 46.101c and 46.102d [12] and with the guidelines for defining public health research and public health non-research [13], MMP was determined to be a nonresearch, public health surveillance activity used for disease control program or policy purposes. We estimated each of these three outcomes separately by year and stratified by sex, age group, race/ethnicity, and sexual orientation. Beta-coefficients for year represent the average percentage point change from 1 year to the next. Last, viral suppression increased more among heterosexual persons (14–16% increase) compared with MSM (9% increase).Overall and in all demographic sub-groups, increases in viral suppression were at least partially mediated by increases in ART prescription, although most linear trends in viral suppression remained significant after adjustment for ART prescription. Overall, the 2 percentage point average annual increase in viral suppression at last viral load test (β = 0.020, P for trend <0.01) decreased to 1.4 percentage points (β = 0.014, P for trend <0.01) after adjusting for ART prescription (not shown); thus, increases in ART prescription accounted for 30% of the increase in viral suppression.Among persons aged 18–29 years, increases in ART prescription accounted for most (75%) of the linear increase in viral suppression at last viral load test (Table 2). The linear trend for viral suppression was no longer significant after adjustment for ART prescription in this age group (β = 0.008, P for trend = 0.3). The trend for viral suppression among Hispanics was no longer significant after adjustment for ART prescription (β = 0.009, P for trend = 0.07). Sustained viral suppressionIn 2013, 68.0% of adults in HIV clinical care had sustained viral suppression compared with 57.6% in 2009, representing a 17% increase over time (β = 0.027, P for trend <0.01) (Fig. The three percentage point average annual increase in sustained viral suppression (β = 0.027, P for trend <0.01) decreased to two percentage points (β = 0.022, P for trend <0.01) after adjustment for ART prescription; ART prescription accounted for nearly 19% of the increase in sustained viral suppression (not shown). Linear trends for sustained viral suppression remained significant after adjustment for ART prescription in all sub-groups (Table 3). Increased access to medications and better adherence may have also played a role in these improvements. Using data from the Medical Monitoring Project (MMP), a nationally representative sample of HIV-infected adults in care, we estimated trends from 2009 to 2013 in ART prescription and viral suppression among persons receiving HIV clinical care. The significant increases in ART prescription and viral suppression among young people and non-Hispanic blacks are encouraging, but a sustained focus on addressing social determinants of health for access to and delivery of clinical care and supportive services is needed for elimination of these disparities. First, viral load measurements were only available for tests that patients received as part of routine clinical care, so we do not have information on viral load between laboratory tests or duration of viral suppression beyond the year prior to interview. 