One factor influencing the availability of providers is how urban or rural an area is. It has been shown in several states that relative to rural areas, urban areas contain a disproportionately larger number of practicing dentists. (20) Our findings provide further evidence of the need for care coordination that links high-risk children to available dental providers, since many options for care are bypassed in favor of clinics that are further away and have longer wait times. (9) Therefore, dental access may actually be better for Medicaid-insured children compared with those whose families do not qualify for assistance but nevertheless cannot afford to pay for dental insurance or out-of-pocket for care. Although limited availability of dental providers in a community may contribute to the lower utilization of dental services by young Medicaid-enrolled children, our results suggest that distance to available dental providers in a high-resource area is not sufficient for explaining barriers to dental utilization. Prior to this analysis, each clinic was contacted by phone to confirm acceptance of Medicaid-insured children at 1 year of age, and determine typical wait-times for new patients.We also used dental-related survey data that had been obtained on a sample of children who received medical care at an academic primary care clinic (PCC) in Pittsburgh. The survey excluded children with special needs that would increase normal dental care efforts, such as severe behavioral or cognitive disorders. We also geocoded and mapped the PCC’s location, from which dental-related survey data was obtained. Lastly, we did not map addresses for children who received dental care at a clinic noted as “other” on the survey, as we could not determine distances from their home addresses to unknown dental clinic locations. (3) Because ECC disproportionately affects children from low-income families (1, 4), being able to afford dental treatment could be a barrier to receiving it. Although these decisions were made to produce the most favorable travel conditions for both driving and bus travel, this may have created bias for shorter travel times for driving since busses are also subject to traffic.PCC survey data was used to determine distances traveled by a sample of children from their home addresses to the PCC, and this was compared to distances traveled to their reported dental clinic, if known. Allegheny County contains 12% of all general dentists in Pennsylvania, which is the highest proportion in the state. Despite this, Medicaid-insured children are more likely to go without preventive or restorative dental care than are children with private insurance. Academic clinic i was an outlier with a wait time of 24 weeks.Figure 2 displays the geographical distribution of low-income children in Pittsburgh and shows that many high poverty census tracts tend to be concentrated near the rivers. Medicaid-insured Children using the PCC Live Proximal to Dental Clinics Accepting MedicaidWe found that many children travel to the PCC for medical care from locations that are further away than their nearest dental clinic. This study is the first to our knowledge to examine dental use by children living in a high resource area and characterize specific distance and travel-related variables to receiving dental care for young Medicaid-insured children. Relative to other areas in Pennsylvania, Allegheny County and its urban center of Pittsburgh represent a high resource area. Relative to other areas in Pennsylvania, Allegheny County and its urban center of Pittsburgh represent a high resource area. They did not utilize dental services as often as children with private dental insurance, however. 