Key exclusion criteria were: cardiac index (CI) ≤2.0 L/min/m2 requiring inotropic agents within the last 6 months prior to screening, obstructive or restrictive cardiomyopathy, moderate to severe heart valve disease, or atrial fibrillation with resting heart rate > 100 b.p.m. Haemodynamic parametersHaemodynamic variables were measured at rest and during supine ergometer exercise. Ergometer resistance (Lode ergometer, Groningen, The Netherlands) was increased every 3 min with 20 W increments until maximal effort was achieved. A Swan – Ganz catheter was positioned in the pulmonary artery via the internal jugular or brachial vein using fluoroscopy. Systemic vascular resistance (SVR) was calculated as 80 x (mean arterial pressure – mean CVP)/CO. Pulmonary vascular resistance (PVR) in Wood units was calculated as (mPAP – mean PCWP)/CO. Statistical analysesBaseline characteristics were compared using t-tests or rank-sum tests for continuous variables, as appropriate. Numerical values are reported as mean ± standard deviation, median [interquartile range (IQR)], or counts (%). To identify haemodynamic measures that were associated with 6MWT performance below or above the median, logistic regression was used with haemodynamic variables at rest, peak exercise, and absolute changes from rest to peak exercise.The assumptions of linear regression were formally tested and found to be true, except for co-linearity which was present between CVP and mPAP (rest), and mPAP and PCWP (rest/exercise), as expected. Overall, 64 patients were enrolled and all performed the 6MWT. Regression coefficients are summarized in Table 2.At low exercise intensity (20 W)During exercise at 20 W, univariate associations were significant between 6MWT and CVP (P = 0.042), mPAP (P = 0.017), PCWP (P = 0.016) and PCWL20 (P = 0.013). Regression coefficients are summarized in Table 3.At peak exerciseAt peak exercise, univariate associations were significant between 6MWT and CVP (P = 0.020), CI (P = 0.044), PCWP/CI (P = 0.037), and PCWL (P < 0.001). Hemodynamic measures and six-minute walk testAt restIn this study, haemodynamic measures at rest were relatively poor predictors of 6MWT performance. The strongest associations were observed during peak exercise and when changes from baseline to peak exercise were analysed.The haemodynamic measures most strongly associated with 6MWT after multivariable adjustment were mPAP, CI and PCWL. In this study, PCWL was the strongest variable associated with 6MWT during exercise. This reiterates the value of obtaining measurements during exercise to assess functional capacity, as well as the importance of factors beyond haemodynamics.Implications for the six-minute walk test as an outcome measure in clinical trialsAlthough measures of filling pressure, CO and PCWL have been shown to be associated with maximal exercise capacity in HFpEF patients, as assessed by maximal oxygen uptake,3,4,19,21 the associations with an easily obtainable measure of daily physical activity such as the 6MWT have not been previously explored. In addition to peripheral factors, 6MWT performance is likely influenced by factors such as obesity, anaemia, sarcopenia, diabetes, frailty, orthopaedic problems, and other frequent co-morbidities of HFpEF.26,34 Hence, the 6MWT might be a global indicator of multiple risk factors as well as abnormal exercise haemodynamics present in HFpEF patients.The modest invasive haemodynamic associations with 6MWT may potentially help explain the heterogeneous results of intervention trials that have tested preload and afterload modifying therapies for improving 6MWT performance. In HFpEF studies with 6MWT as an outcome and cardiovascular modifying drugs as the intervention (e.g. The haemodynamic parameters most closely associated with 6MWT performance were measures of filling pressure and/or CI recorded during exercise. Independent haemodynamic measures during peak exercise associated with median 6MWT performance using logistic regression with stepwise selection.Table S6. 