We found that PC1 and PC2 segregated the three populations (Fig. We found that PC1 and PC2 segregated the three populations (Fig. We found that PC1 and PC2 segregated the three populations (Fig. This statistic sums over the overlaps (products) of BCR sequence read counts, scaled by a measure of the diversity within each sample: 1 as completely different and 0 as identical. There was also a large dissimilarity between the unswitched, switched, and splenic B cell samples. Within the IgM+IgD+ repertoire the most highly abundant BCRs were shared among all replicates, while the BCRs that were highest in the IgM−IgD− repertoire were more variable and most were expressed in only one or two mice, confirming the analysis with the Morisita-Horn index (Fig. Thymic B cells respond poorly to mitogens like LPS or anti-IgM in vitro, but can proliferate when cultured with MHC class II-restricted T cell blasts or anti-CD40 and IL-10 (Inaba et al , 1990; 1995). Thymic B cells respond poorly to mitogens like LPS or anti-IgM in vitro, but can proliferate when cultured with MHC class II-restricted T cell blasts or anti-CD40 and IL-10 (Inaba et al , 1990; 1995). While we found a slight increase in the proportion of BCRs containing a single mutation in the switched repertoire (up to 4.2% from 0.1%), we did not observe signs of accumulated somatic hypermutation (Fig. As a further confirmation, we analyzed full-length BCR sequences of light chains cloned from the IgM+IgD+ and IgM−IgD− repertoires (60 sequences from each repertoire). The lack of mutations in light chains was not an artifact of the 3H9 transgenic mice because germinal center B cells isolated from mesenteric lymph node of these mice showed significant numbers of mutations (Fig. The lack of mutations in light chains was not an artifact of the 3H9 transgenic mice because germinal center B cells isolated from mesenteric lymph node of these mice showed significant numbers of mutations (Fig. The lack of mutations in light chains was not an artifact of the 3H9 transgenic mice because germinal center B cells isolated from mesenteric lymph node of these mice showed significant numbers of mutations (Fig. These results suggest that AID’s class switch recombination and somatic hypermutation functions are differentially regulated in thymic B cells. These results suggest that AID’s class switch recombination and somatic hypermutation functions are differentially regulated in thymic B cells. This could be due to a unique aspartic acid residue in CDR1, which is negatively charged and might counteract the arginine residues. The presence of these class-switched thymic B cells is dependent on cognate interactions with thymocytes and activation-induced cytidine deaminase (AID). Finally CD4+ T cells from AID−/− mice show signs of increased autoreactivity, suggesting that thymic B cell class switching promotes CD4 T cell tolerance. Clearly these peptides are not acquired through internalization of autoreactive BCRs. Clearly these peptides are not acquired through internalization of autoreactive BCRs. Taken together, these results suggest that thymic B cell licensing is BCR-independent whereas class switching is BCR-dependent. The IgG cytoplasmic tails contain a conserved YXXM amino acid motif that functions as an internalization signal for antigen processing and presentation. Using transgenic mice expressing antigen-specific IgM, IgG or a chimeric IgM with the IgG cytoplasmic tail, Martin and Goodnow showed that the IgG tail greatly enhanced the survival of progeny cells, leading to expanded numbers(Martin and Goodnow, 2002). Future studies will be needed to determine the exact contribution of thymic class-switched B cells in shaping T cell repertoire. Future studies will be needed to determine the exact contribution of thymic class-switched B cells in shaping T cell repertoire. Cell sorting for 3H9 class-switched vs unswitched populations was performed on a FACSAria (BD). Cell sorting for 3H9 class-switched vs unswitched populations was performed on a FACSAria (BD). Cell sorting for 3H9 class-switched vs unswitched populations was performed on a FACSAria (BD). Total RNA was isolated from thymic B cells using the RNA microprep kit (Zymo Research). Total RNA was isolated from thymic B cells using the RNA microprep kit (Zymo Research). cDNA was synthesized with ProtoScript® II reverse transcriptase (NEB) by using 250ng of total RNA and poly d(T)18. 2 μl of the 1st round PCR product was used as the template for the 2nd round PCR. 2 μl of the 1st round PCR product was used as the template for the 2nd round PCR. These cells were distinct from B220+IgM− thymic B cell progenitors that expressed lower levels of CD19 and B220 and were not included in this gate (Perera et al , 2013). The first round was amplified for 10 cycles, after which, this product was used to prime a 2nd round PCR with primers to add the required adapters and barcodes for the Illumina platform. PCR products were gel purified, mixed at equimolar ratios, and submitted to University of Chicago Functional Genomics Facility for quality control and sequencing on the Illumina HiSeq (1×150bp). Only unique V-J-CDR3 amino acid combinations that comprised at least 0.1% of the total counts in any sample were included in the principal components analysis (PCA). The Morisita-Horn dissimilarity index measures the degree of alignment between population proportion vectors by calculating their geometric cosine angle normalized by the sum of their individual Simpson diversities. Following cloning and full length sequence confirmation, light chains matching V-J-CDR3 combinations of interest were co-transfected alongside the 3H9 heavy chain in 293A cells for expression. Images were acquired using a Leica DMRB on the 63x oil objective at room temperature using a Qimaging Retiga 2000R camera with Q Capture Pro software. Images were acquired using a Leica DMRB on the 63x oil objective at room temperature using a Qimaging Retiga 2000R camera with Q Capture Pro software. After 7 days, transferred T cells were identified by congenic marker, and CFSE dilution and Tfh cells was assessed. 4) argues that the levels of AID observed in thymic B cells are sufficient to drive class switching. Antigens that are bound by the BCR are internalized and presented much more efficiently than by other APCs (reviewed in (Lanzavecchia, 1990; Yuseff et al , 2013)). Antigens that are bound by the BCR are internalized and presented much more efficiently than by other APCs (reviewed in (Lanzavecchia, 1990; Yuseff et al , 2013)). Serving as controls, CD4+CD8+ thymocytes showed little exchange whereas splenic B cells exchanged readily and reached equilibrium of about 50%. Serving as controls, CD4+CD8+ thymocytes showed little exchange whereas splenic B cells exchanged readily and reached equilibrium of about 50%. 3C).To further test whether there could be a niche for thymic class-switched B cells that may limit their exchange, we generated parabiotic mice with WT (CD45.1) and AID−/− (CD45.2) mice (Fig. WT thymic class-switched B cells in AID−/− mice after joining with a WT partner could be due to two possible events: 1) unswitched WT B cells recirculates to the thymus of AID−/− partner and class switch intrathymically; 2) WT pre-existing class-switched B cells recirculate to the thymus of AID−/− partner. 3F), and there were many fewer class-switched thymic B cells in AID−/− partners than in WT partners (Fig. 3F), and there were many fewer class-switched thymic B cells in AID−/− partners than in WT partners (Fig. 3F), and there were many fewer class-switched thymic B cells in AID−/− partners than in WT partners (Fig. The 3H9 transgenic mice exhibit excellent heavy chain allelic exclusion, and the contribution of endogenous light chains to 3H9 binding specificities is well characterized, facilitating analysis of alterations in polyclonal repertoire. Our sequencing covered broad a range of Igκ families, although certain Igκ families (Vκ2, Vκ11, Vκ13, Vκ11) were under-represented due to mismatches of the PCR forward primer with these particular V genes. 