Axon pruning via axon fragmentation or by axosome shedding result in axonal fragments left behind. Axon pruning via axon fragmentation or by axosome shedding result in axonal fragments left behind. Following dendrite severing and local degeneration, the dendritic debris of Drosophila da neurons is also removed in a timely fashion. Following dendrite severing and local degeneration, the dendritic debris of Drosophila da neurons is also removed in a timely fashion. Following dendrite severing and local degeneration, the dendritic debris of Drosophila da neurons is also removed in a timely fashion. Following dendrite severing and local degeneration, the dendritic debris of Drosophila da neurons is also removed in a timely fashion. Following dendrite severing and local degeneration, the dendritic debris of Drosophila da neurons is also removed in a timely fashion. Early studies have reported that plasmatocytes, phagocytic blood cells, are responsible for engulfing dendritic debris and in a few cases were seen to “attack” intact branches [32]. Apart from this descriptive study, however, we know virtually nothing about the cellular and molecular mechanism of neurite fragment clearance in mammalian systems. Indeed Draper is known to play a key role in the engulfment of apoptotic cells, and was recently shown to bind directly to PS [84]. Indeed Draper is known to play a key role in the engulfment of apoptotic cells, and was recently shown to bind directly to PS [84]. Indeed Draper is known to play a key role in the engulfment of apoptotic cells, and was recently shown to bind directly to PS [84]. Indeed Draper is known to play a key role in the engulfment of apoptotic cells, and was recently shown to bind directly to PS [84]. One possibility is that signaling from the Sema3F receptor complex indirectly controls the reverse signaling by EB3. Pruning by TGF-β receptorsIn Drosophila, signaling by the TGF-β receptor complex controls developmental pruning of both MB axons [91] and da dendrites [31] Fengwei Yu, personal communication). In MB neurons, the TGF-β receptor complex includes the type I receptor Baboon (Babo) and either one of the type II receptors Punt (Put) or Wishful thinking (Wit)[91]. As a consequence, we will not discuss all of the neuronal systems that undergo remodeling nor all of the important work done in the field. While TGF-β signaling does regulate the expression of EcR-B1 within MB γ neurons, the precise temporal regulation is achieved by the systemic release of the steroid hormone ecdysone, which in turn modulates the activity of EcR-B1. Pruning by death receptorsAxon elimination might be seen as the “death” of an axon. To induce competition, the authors silenced synaptic activity by inducing the expression of the tetanus toxin light chain, which inhibits neurosecretory activity, in a small random subset of olfactory neurons. Importantly, when most of the olfactory neurons were silenced, no pruning was detected suggesting that competition, rather then lack of activity by itself induces the pruning process. Importantly, when most of the olfactory neurons were silenced, no pruning was detected suggesting that competition, rather then lack of activity by itself induces the pruning process. The relative contribution of the DIAP1 vs Cullin1 dependent proteasome degradation remains to be determined.In contrast to our knowledge about the roles of the UPS in the pruning of fly da neuron dendrites, the exact function of the UPS in the pruning of fly MB axons is less clear. Although initially discovered as executers of apoptotic cell death, it is now well established that these family of proteases are regulators of cell morphogenesis [104,105]. Early studies on fly da neurons provided clear evidence that the initiator caspase, Dronc (the Casapses-9 homolog), and the executer caspases, Drice and DCP-1 (homologs of Casapse-3), are essential for developmental da dendrite pruning [63,36,35]. This requirement was shown in both global deprivation, in which cell death accompany axonal elimination, as well as in axonal restricted deprivation using compartmentalized chambers. In Drosophila, calcium transients through a voltage-gated calcium channel in da dendrites were postulated to activate calpains, which facilitate efficient pruning [111]. Downstream elements: breakdown of the axonal cytoskeletonThe neuronal cytoskeleton consists of three major cytoskeletal elements: neurofilaments (NFs), actin and microtubules. MTs are highly dynamic polymers whose assembly and disassembly is controlled by β tubulin guanosine triphosphate (GTP) hydrolyzation [121]. Furthermore, the MT stabilizing agent paclitaxel is sufficient to protect MT depolymerization as well as axon fragmentation following trophic deprivation in vitro [123]. The molecular machinery that executes this breakdown is largely unknown. In contrast to Sox14, MICAL is important for da dendrite but not MB axon pruning [129], suggesting that SOX14 may activate a different pruning program in different neurons. In contrast to Sox14, MICAL is important for da dendrite but not MB axon pruning [129], suggesting that SOX14 may activate a different pruning program in different neurons. Finally, spatial and perhaps also temporal regulation is provided by the TGF-β signaling cascade (as discussed above). An additional enigma is how a transcription factor would control a process that is tightly spatially regulated. An additional enigma is how a transcription factor would control a process that is tightly spatially regulated. An additional enigma is how a transcription factor would control a process that is tightly spatially regulated. Moreover, the current data is still consistent with two main models – in one, the UPS is required to target a key molecule whose degradation initiates pruning; in the second, the UPS targets many proteins whose SUM degradation results in pruning. Recent studies suggest that the threshold of caspase activation determines whether it affects morphogenesis or activates cell death [134]. Recent studies suggest that the threshold of caspase activation determines whether it affects morphogenesis or activates cell death [134]. Recent studies suggest that the threshold of caspase activation determines whether it affects morphogenesis or activates cell death [134]. Recent studies suggest that the threshold of caspase activation determines whether it affects morphogenesis or activates cell death [134]. Recent studies suggest that the threshold of caspase activation determines whether it affects morphogenesis or activates cell death [134]. Recent studies suggest that the threshold of caspase activation determines whether it affects morphogenesis or activates cell death [134]. Is each case of pruning initiated by a different signal or are we yet to discover some common signal? Is each case of pruning initiated by a different signal or are we yet to discover some common signal? Interestingly, the TGF-β pathway was recently found to regulate neuronal C1q expression, which in turn is important for synaptic elimination by microglia at the developing mouse dLGN [136]. We want to provide a few speculative reasons that might explain why evolution sculpted neurodevelopment in this way by addressing specific examples. We want to provide a few speculative reasons that might explain why evolution sculpted neurodevelopment in this way by addressing specific examples. One clear example is the remodeling of da neurons in Drosophila – while the soma and axon remain intact, dendrites remodel to reflect the metamorphing animal and thus new connection. Although axon degeneration is a term that can sometimes be used to describe pruning and subsequent elimination, in this review, we will use degeneration to describe pathological conditions during disease and following injury (for example, in Wallerian Degeneration – see more below) while we will use fragmentation followed by clearance to describe developmental neurite pruning. Although axon degeneration is a term that can sometimes be used to describe pruning and subsequent elimination, in this review, we will use degeneration to describe pathological conditions during disease and following injury (for example, in Wallerian Degeneration – see more below) while we will use fragmentation followed by clearance to describe developmental neurite pruning. The answer to “why” stereotyped pruning occurs as an evolutionary solution remains a mystery. The answer to “why” stereotyped pruning occurs as an evolutionary solution remains a mystery. The answer to “why” stereotyped pruning occurs as an evolutionary solution remains a mystery. The answer to “why” stereotyped pruning occurs as an evolutionary solution remains a mystery. Anterograde labeling followed by careful microscopic analysis has revealed that the exuberant connections undergo fragmentation [18] and are later removed by an unknown mechanism. Anterograde labeling followed by careful microscopic analysis has revealed that the exuberant connections undergo fragmentation [18] and are later removed by an unknown mechanism. Anterograde labeling followed by careful microscopic analysis has revealed that the exuberant connections undergo fragmentation [18] and are later removed by an unknown mechanism. Despite its beauty and simplicity, it has become evident in recent years that the chemoaffinity theory provides only a partial answer to how the wiring of the nervous system is established in vivo during development. Genetic as well as live imaging experiments in both systems should help shed light on these open questionsThe mechanisms of neurite fragmentation are better understood, however, in the case of the remodeling of the dendritic arborization (da) neurons in Drosophila [32,31,33]. The dendrites of these sensory neurons cover the larval body wall in a nicely tiled manner [34]. However, the extent of the molecular similarity between dendrite remodeling of da neurons and Wallerian degeneration is not yet clear. However, the extent of the molecular similarity between dendrite remodeling of da neurons and Wallerian degeneration is not yet clear. For example, axon pruning of the hippocampal infrapyramidal bundle (IPB) in mammals is currently assumed to occur via axon retraction although this is mostly based on lack of fragmentation and direct evidence for retraction is lacking (Figure 3;[45] ). For example, axon pruning of the hippocampal infrapyramidal bundle (IPB) in mammals is currently assumed to occur via axon retraction although this is mostly based on lack of fragmentation and direct evidence for retraction is lacking (Figure 3;[45] ). For example, axon pruning of the hippocampal infrapyramidal bundle (IPB) in mammals is currently assumed to occur via axon retraction although this is mostly based on lack of fragmentation and direct evidence for retraction is lacking (Figure 3;[45] ). The elimination of these exuberant connections is largely timed to postnatal development in vertebrates but the precise timing varies among organisms [7]. Pruning by axosome sheddingDuring development of the mammalian neuromuscular junction (NMJ) pervasive synapse elimination occurs after birth amounting to the elimination of ~90% of existing synapses [47,48]. 