For this purpose, we sequenced exon 2 of PRKCI from genomic DNA prepared from our panel of cell lines. We focused on exon 2 of PRKCI because it encodes the PB1 domain of PKCι, including Cys69, the specific amino acid residue within PKCι targeted by ATM 7. These data indicate that ATM sensitivity is not a result of general drug sensitivity in ATM responsive cells. We next assessed the ability of ATM to inhibit lung cancer cell tumorigenicity at these dose levels. A427 cell tumors were highly responsive to ATM, exhibiting statistically significant inhibition of tumor growth at all concentrations tested (Figure 2B). A427 cell tumors were highly responsive to ATM, exhibiting statistically significant inhibition of tumor growth at all concentrations tested (Figure 2B). These data indicate that the growth inhibitory effects of ATM are due predominantly to inhibition of cell proliferation without significant induction of tumor cell apoptosis.It is possible that ATM decreases tumor cell proliferation indirectly by inhibiting tumor vascularization. To assess this possibility, A427 and H460 cell tumors were stained for the endothelial cell marker PECAM1 (Figure 4B). PKCι regulates Rac1 through a conserved Phox and Bem1p (PB1) protein interaction domain within the regulatory region of PKCι 6. A427 and H460 cell tumors from ATM-treated mice exhibited reduced levels of phospho-Erk 1,2 when normalized to total Erk (phospho-Erk/total Erk) (Figure 4D). This dismal clinical outlook has prompted a search for more effective strategies to treat NSCLC. This dismal clinical outlook has prompted a search for more effective strategies to treat NSCLC. Our results provide proof of principle for targeting the oncogenic PKCι signaling pathway in a mechanism-based approach to the treatment of lung cancer. Our results provide proof of principle for targeting the oncogenic PKCι signaling pathway in a mechanism-based approach to the treatment of lung cancer. SCLC is difficult to treat and few therapeutic options exist for the substantial number of SCLC patients that fail standard therapy. SCLC is difficult to treat and few therapeutic options exist for the substantial number of SCLC patients that fail standard therapy. Our current results indicate that ATM may be particularly effective in lung tumors that harbor PRKCI amplification since the two most ATM responsive tumor cell lines in our study harbor PRKCI amplification. PKCι over-expression is not confined to tumor cells harboring PRKCI amplification. These data argue that PKCι over-expression, rather than PRKCI gene amplification per se, is an important characteristic of ATM response. Interestingly, when considered as a whole, LAC and LSCC tumors over-express PKCι to similar levels 4. Interestingly, when considered as a whole, LAC and LSCC tumors over-express PKCι to similar levels 4. Interestingly, when considered as a whole, LAC and LSCC tumors over-express PKCι to similar levels 4. Interestingly, when considered as a whole, LAC and LSCC tumors over-express PKCι to similar levels 4. Based on our current findings, this latter subset of LAC may be particularly responsive to ATM. Based on our current findings, this latter subset of LAC may be particularly responsive to ATM. However, our present results provide a compelling rationale for the clinical development of ATM for the treatment of lung cancer, and provide a molecular basis for patient stratification in ongoing clinical trials of ATM. mRNA abundance is expressed as 2−Ct PKCι−Ct18S); PKCι protein expression is expressed in optical density units normalized to PKCι expression in A549 cells. Anchorage-independent Growth AssaysAnchorage-independent growth was assessed by the ability to grow as colonies in soft agar in the presence of chemotherapeutic agents at the concentrations indicated in the figures as described previously 6. The concentration of chemotherapeutic agent resulting in 50% growth inhibition (IC50) was calculated using SigmaPlot for Windows10.0 (San Jose, CA). Protein concentrations were determined using the Pierce bicinchoninic acid (BCA) Protein Assay Kit (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL) using bovine serum albumin (BSA) as a standard. RNA Isolation and Quantitative PCRTotal RNA was extracted using RNAqueous (Ambion, Austin, TX), according to the manufacturer's protocols. Reagents for quantitative real time PCR (QPCR) analysis of human PKCι, Par6α, Par6β, Par6γ, p62, TrxR1 and TrxR2 mRNA abundance were purchased from Applied Biosystems (Foster City, CA). The presence of mutations in EGFR, and to a lesser extent, the presence of EGFR amplification and elevated EGFR expression, correlate positively with therapeutic response to the TKIs gefitinib and erlotinib 3. Sections were subjected to immunohistochemical analysis using antibodies to expression of BrdU, TUNEL and PECAM1 as described previously 6. Mice were anesthetized by CO2 inhalation and the caudal (inferior) vena cava was identified and dissected free of surrounding connective tissue. These molecular and clinical characteristics have been used successfully to guide TKI therapy to patients most likely to respond. These molecular and clinical characteristics have been used successfully to guide TKI therapy to patients most likely to respond. Clearly, there exists a need to identify effective mechanism-based therapeutics that target prevalent molecular characteristics in lung cancer patients who are not responsive to currently available therapy. Immunoblot analysis of PKCι protein expression (see Supplemental Figure 1) revealed a statistically significant correlation between PKCι protein and PKCι mRNA abundance and between PKCι protein abundance and ATM sensitivity (Table 1). Immunoblot analysis of PKCι protein expression (see Supplemental Figure 1) revealed a statistically significant correlation between PKCι protein and PKCι mRNA abundance and between PKCι protein abundance and ATM sensitivity (Table 1). Immunoblot analysis of PKCι protein expression (see Supplemental Figure 1) revealed a statistically significant correlation between PKCι protein and PKCι mRNA abundance and between PKCι protein abundance and ATM sensitivity (Table 1). 