1A) the threshold, peak amplitude, full width at half maximum of the first and last APs of the train, amplitude of spike afterhyperpolarization (AHP) and decay times at 25, 50 and 75% of AHP amplitude after the first and last AP. For example, a bursting pattern would result in very different minimum and maximum ISI values and as a consequence a large CV of the ISI distribution. Dissimilarities in individual spike shape, spike frequency adaptation and AP amplitude accommodation are also reflected by our measurements. In contrast, periglomerular cells (PGCs) have the smallest somata among JGCs and a small, spine-bearing dendritic tuft (Pinching & Powell, 1971a; Shepherd et al , 2004). 5).Next, we discarded those measured and calculated parameters that showed an obvious dependence on two important experimental variables. 5).Next, we discarded those measured and calculated parameters that showed an obvious dependence on two important experimental variables. We also tested whether the measured and calculated parameters depended on the amount of injected current to evoke the spike trains. Short-axon cells of the glomerular layer (GL) have an intermediate soma size and are distinguished by dendrites that arborize around the glomeruli in the periglomerular region without forming an apical tuft (Pinching & Powell, 1971a; Aungst et al , 2003; Shepherd et al , 2004). Statistical comparisons revealed that (i) the threshold of the first AP (cluster 1, −36.1 ± 3.7 mV vs. cluster 2, −33.3 ± 4.9 mV; Fig. 3) and did not change to burst firing when hyperpolarized to −60 mVor more negative membrane potentials. 3) and did not change to burst firing when hyperpolarized to −60 mVor more negative membrane potentials. Cells belonging to cluster 2 displayed very different spike frequency adaptations (Figs 3B and 4D), amplitude and time course of AHP (Figs 3B and 4A) or τ (Fig. 5B and D), but cells that showed active subthreshold resonance had a higher peak frequency in cluster 1. However, if a cell showed signs of obvious truncation (e.g. However, if a cell showed signs of obvious truncation (e.g. To reduce the number of dimensions within which clustering was carried out, we performed PCA of the 18 anatomical parameters. 6A indicates that four factors had eigenvalues > 1, accounting for > 73% of the total variance. 6A indicates that four factors had eigenvalues > 1, accounting for > 73% of the total variance. Fifteen out of the 18 variables differed significantly (P < 0.05) between the groups (Table 2).These results demonstrate that most of the measured morphological parameters are significantly different between the two ETC subpopulations. PCA indicated seven factors with eigenvalues of > 1 (Fig. However, a very close agreement between the results of clustering based on all parameters and only the physiological parameters was also observed. Our results demonstrate the presence of two subpopulations of ETCs of the rat MOB based on their active and passive intrinsic electrical properties and their dendritic morphologies. Over 30 electrophysiological and 18 morphological parameters were measured and calculated for > 60 randomly selected ETCs. Interestingly, ETCs with secondary dendrites predominantly express the α3 subunit, resulting in a strongly immunoreactive dendritic plexus in the outer one-third of the EPL. Interestingly, ETCs with secondary dendrites predominantly express the α3 subunit, resulting in a strongly immunoreactive dendritic plexus in the outer one-third of the EPL. Interestingly, despite the observed morphological heterogeneity of ETCs, Hayar et al  (2004b) described rather uniform electrophysiological properties of the ETCs. Most notably, they reported only burst firing behaviours irrespective of whether spontaneous activity was monitored in cell-attached mode or firing was evoked by current injections in the whole-cell configuration. However, one obvious difference between these cells and the ETCs in our study is that the somata of these cells are located in the EPL, whereas all cells of our study were in a juxtaglomerular position. Despite the different names, their functional roles could be very similar in olfactory processing. Interestingly, there was an almost perfect match between the subgroups derived from the morphological and electrophysiological parameters, demonstrating that a number of functional and structural properties of ETCs are highly predictive of one another. Whether the two ETC subpopulations are responsible for this functional difference or whether cells within each subgroup participate in both commissural and associational projections remains to be determined. After an additional 30–60-min period of recovery at 33 °C, slices were incubated at room temperature until they were transferred to the recording chamber. Cells were recorded with a potassium gluconate-based intracellular solution (containing, in mm: K-gluconate, 120; KCl, 5; MgCl2, 2; EGTA, 0.05; HEPES, 10; Mg-ATP, 2; Mg-GTP, 0.4; creatinine phosphate, 10; and biocytin, 5.3–8; pH 7.25, osmolarity 270–290 mOsm). The passive membrane properties were derived from single exponentials fitted to traces of membrane voltage responses to small (1–20 pA, 400 ms) hyper- and depolarizing current injections. The passive membrane properties were derived from single exponentials fitted to traces of membrane voltage responses to small (1–20 pA, 400 ms) hyper- and depolarizing current injections. The passive membrane properties were derived from single exponentials fitted to traces of membrane voltage responses to small (1–20 pA, 400 ms) hyper- and depolarizing current injections. The passive membrane properties were derived from single exponentials fitted to traces of membrane voltage responses to small (1–20 pA, 400 ms) hyper- and depolarizing current injections. Data were digitized on-line at 10 or 20 kHz, and analysed with EVAN 1.3 (Nusser et al , 2001) and with an in-house analysis software (SPIN 1.0.1) written in Matlab (Matlab 7.0; The MathWorks Inc., Natick, MA, USA). All measured physiological parameters are listed in Table 1. Recorded cells: visualization and reconstructionAfter recordings, slices were placed in a fixative containing 4% paraformaldehyde, 1.25% glutaraldehyde and 15 v/v% picric acid in 0.1 m phosphate buffer (PB; pH 7.4) at 4 °C. After several washes in PB, slices were embedded in gelatin and re-sectioned at 60 μm thickness. Biocytin was visualized using avidin–biotin–horseradish peroxidase complex (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA) followed by a reaction with 3′3-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (0.05% solution in Tris buffer, pH 7.4) as chromogen and 0.01% H2O2 as oxidant for 12 min. Parameters where a significant correlation (P < 0.01) was found were discarded from our analysis (see Table 1). PCA (Joliffe & Morgan, 1992) and agglomerative clustering methods were carried out with Statistica 6.0 (StatSoft, Inc., Tulsa, OK, USA). Only factors with large eigenvalue (usually > 1) are selected to represent the population. Only factors with large eigenvalue (usually > 1) are selected to represent the population. Then the reverse comparison was carried out (members of clusters 1 and 2 from the centre of cluster 2; Figs 2E, 6E and 9D). If both of these tests were statistically significant (P < 0.001) then we would conclude that ETCs form two subpopulations. Subsequently, a similar statistical comparison was carried out with three clusters, four clusters, etc. Subsequently, a similar statistical comparison was carried out with three clusters, four clusters, etc. 