Human findings were further validated in two independent human newborn cohorts from other low-resource settings [The Gambia and Papua New Guinea (PNG)] (Fig. Identical changes in pathways consistent with EG were detectable in all human cohorts and were limited to an early post-BCG time point. The ability to protect was rapid, short-lived, and dependent on BCG administration in the neonatal and juvenile, but not adult, age groups. Although appropriately powered human newborn trial data are lacking (39), prophylactic administration of rG-CSF to newborns at risk could potentially be protective. Cytokine measurement assays had sample size selected to maximize the use of multiplex plate and standards. Lung histology experiments were performed with five mice per group (40). Nonbreeding mice were maintained on standard rodent food (Teklad, 2918), whereas breeding mice were on a high-fat diet (Teklad, 2919), and both had water ad libitum. Nonbreeding mice were maintained on standard rodent food (Teklad, 2918), whereas breeding mice were on a high-fat diet (Teklad, 2919), and both had water ad libitum. 1A and data file S1). Briefly, CS was obtained from adult (aged 6 to 12 weeks) male caeca and resuspended in dextrose 5% water (D5W; Baxter, JB0081) at a concentration of 160 mg CS/ml D5W and then passed through a 70-μm filter (Falcon, 352350). Before challenge, a working stock was prepared on the basis of the average weight of the litter. Before challenge, a working stock was prepared on the basis of the average weight of the litter. Individual doses were then adjusted through multiplying the average dose by each mouse’s percent weight difference compared with that litter’s average weight. The stock was diluted in endotoxin-free Dulbecco’s phosphate-buffered saline (dPBS) (Gibco, catalog no. This strategy allowed for injection volumes and dosages of LPS to be similar between litters that varied in weight. Humane end point was determined using righting reflex and mobility, as previously described (29). For solid organs, bacterial burden was represented per gram tissue to account for differences in organ and mouse sizes. For solid organs, bacterial burden was represented per gram tissue to account for differences in organ and mouse sizes. For solid organs, bacterial burden was represented per gram tissue to account for differences in organ and mouse sizes. Tissues from multiple age-matched and sex-matched donors were combined into a single 70-μm cell strainer, gently dissociated through the filter using the plunger of a 1-ml syringe, centrifuged for 5 min at 470g, and counted using an automated cell counter and dye (Nexcelom Bioscience Cellometer Auto 2000, ViaStain CS2-0106). S4: (i) adoptive transfer of the heterogeneous whole-spleen compartment, (ii) depletion of mature neutrophils via biotin anti-Ly6G and magnetic anti-biotin separation (Miltenyi, 130-107-911 and 130-097-046), or (iii) neutrophil purification by negative magnetic selection (Miltenyi, 130-097-658). An aliquot of each purification or depletion sample was assessed by flow cytometry using the neutrophil markers CD11bpos, Ly6Ghi, Ly6Cint, CD3neg, MHCIIneg, and NK1.1neg, as described (45), to verify purity, which was consistently >95%. Blood was stored on ice for up to 30 min and centrifuged with soft brake at 650g for 10 min. The panel detected the following 47 analytes: B cell activating factor (BAFF), betacellulin (BTC), epithelial-derived neutrophil-activating peptide 78 (ENA-78), Eotaxin, G-CSF, GM-CSF, growth-regulated oncogene-α (GRO-α), interferon-α (IFN-α), IFN-γ, IL-12p70, IL-10, IL-13, IL-15, IL-17A, IL-18, IL-19, IL-1α, IL-1β, IL-2, IL-22, IL-23, IL-25, IL-27, IL-28, IL-2RA, IL-3, IL-31, IL-33, IL-33R, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-7, IL7-RA, IL-9, interferon gamma-induced protein 10 (IP-10), Leptin, monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (MCP-1), MCP-3, M-CSF, macrophage inflammatory protein-α (MIP-1α), MIP-1β, MIP-2, receptor activator of nuclear factor kappa B ligand (RANKL), regulated on activation, normal T cell expressed and secreted (RANTES), tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α), and vascular endothelial growth factor A (VEGF-A). rG-CSF was tested in a dose-titration flow cytometry experiment with an intraperitoneal injection volume of 40 μl and a range of doses from 10 μg of rG-CSF/g mouse to 0.001 μg/g before the mortality experiment. rG-CSF was tested in a dose-titration flow cytometry experiment with an intraperitoneal injection volume of 40 μl and a range of doses from 10 μg of rG-CSF/g mouse to 0.001 μg/g before the mortality experiment. Before extraction, spleens were moved to RNAlater-ICE transition solution (Invitrogen, AM7030) and held at −20°C for 24 hours as per the manufacturer’s instructions. The probes used for Cebp-β and Cebp-α were designed with a 5′FAM and a 3′QSY quencher to be run in duplex with the housekeeping gene, but in separate wells from each other. First, the whole-spleen cells were homogenized and resuspended in dPBS mixed with viability dye and anti-CD16/32 (clone 2.4G2; BD, 563006). The remainder of the steps were followed as per the manufacturer’s protocol and included the optional deoxyribonuclease I treatment. Hematoxylin and eosin and Ly6G staining was performed on separate but serial sections, and scoring by trained pathologists was performed blinded to treatment group and to study hypotheses. All studies were approved by the University of British Columbia ethics board (protocol nos. Aliquots (200 μl) were immediately placed into 1.3 ml of RNAlater (Invitrogen, AM7020) and stored at −80°C within 3 hours of blood draw until further analysis. Samples were subsequently ground transported to the Medical Research Council (Gambia) on dry ice by the study personnel and then to the UBC (Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada) under temperature-controlled and monitored conditions (World Courier). Whole blood was centrifuged on site at 500g for 10 min at RT, and plasma was removed. Nevertheless, although cytokine responses to challenge with CS differed between BCG and control pups, the cytokine profile after LPS challenge was not affected by BCG. The amount of plasma removed from the whole blood after centrifugation was subsequently replaced with RPMI. The amount of plasma removed from the whole blood after centrifugation was subsequently replaced with RPMI. The amount of plasma removed from the whole blood after centrifugation was subsequently replaced with RPMI. Samples were subsequently shipped to UBC under temperature-controlled and monitored conditions (World Courier). BCG also did not protect mice from intraperitoneally injected LPS-induced endotoxin shock and death (Fig. BCG also did not protect mice from intraperitoneally injected LPS-induced endotoxin shock and death (Fig. sPLS-DA (52) was used to identify discriminatory genes for vaccination status. Normalized neutrophil counts were compared between vaccinated and unvaccinated samples separately for each postvaccination DOL using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test. RNA-seq profiling of human-EPIC whole-blood RNATotal RNA was extracted from each sample, and strand-specific cDNA libraries were generated from poly-adenylated RNA, as previously described (34). All cDNA libraries were prepared at the same time and sequenced on the HiSeq 2500 (Illumina). All cDNA libraries were prepared at the same time and sequenced on the HiSeq 2500 (Illumina). All cDNA libraries were prepared at the same time and sequenced on the HiSeq 2500 (Illumina). We then searched the Broad Institute’s Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB) immunologic gene set collection (C7) (54) for signatures of growth factor–induced changes in neutrophils, indicating possible EG signatures, and found six such gene sets: GSE15139_GMCSF_TREATED_VS_UNTREATED_NEUTROPHILS_DN, GSE15139_GMCSF_TREATED_VS_UNTREATED_NEUTROPHILS_UP, GSE22103_LPS_VS_GMCSF_AND_IFNG_STIM_NEUTROPHIL_DN, GSE22103_LPS_VS_GMCSF_AND_IFNG_STIM_NEUTROPHIL_UP, GSE22103_UN-STIM_VS_GMCSF_AND_IFNG_STIM_NEUTROPHIL_DN, and GSE22103_UNSTIM_VS_GMCSF_AND_IFNG_STIM_NEUTROPHIL_UP.Gene sets corresponding to up- and down-regulated gene lists for equivalent perturbation experiments were combined. Data were tested for normality either by using the Shapiro-Wilk test, rejecting the null hypothesis when P < 0.1, or through visual inspection of qqplot and distribution. Differences were considered significant with P < 0.05, and exact P values or different thresholds of P values were presented in each figure legend. BCG reduced cytokine production after CS challenge but not after LPS.Fig. BCG reduced cytokine production after CS challenge but not after LPS.Fig. Representative flow cytometry plots of BCG-induced increase in total neutrophils and proportional increase in mature neutrophils.Fig. We hypothesized that neutrophils, among the most rapidly acting innate antimicrobial effector cells (26), might play a central role in BCG-induced protection. Validation of the BCG-induced signatures consistent with EG in human newborns.Table S1. To directly examine the role of mature neutrophils, we used both neutrophil depletion (positive selection of mature neutrophils via magnetic antibody labeling of Ly6G+ cells) and purification (negative selection of mature neutrophils via magnetic antibody labeling of all other cells) to determine whether the BCG-induced increase in neutrophils was necessary and/or sufficient to provide the observed protection (adoptive transfer strategy in fig. S5A), yet transfer of purified mature neutrophils did (Fig. Furthermore, scaling up the number of mature control neutrophils to match the number present in a BCG-vaccinated donor spleen or, conversely, scaling down the number of neutrophils in a BCG-vaccinated donor spleen to match the number present in the control donor spleens, provided the same degree of protection (Fig. A pathogen-agnostic approach to broadly protect from neonatal sepsis is urgently needed. In a meta-analysis of three randomized controlled trials comprising 6544 high-risk neonates in low-resource settings, BCG-Denmark administered shortly after birth reduced overall mortality in the first 28 days of life by 38% [95% confidence interval (CI), 17 to 54%] and the in-hospital sepsis case fatality by 54% (2 to 78%); of note, a 45% decrease in mortality was already detected in the first 3 days after BCG administration (6, 10). 3F, with flow cytometry gating strategy shown in fig. 