The inhibitor of p38 MAPK, SB239023, abrogates the effect of fish oil on ILK, whereas the inhibitor of ERK, PD98059, has no effectWe and others have shown that PPARγ ligands activate kinase signaling related to p38 MAPK and extracellular signal-regulated kinase½ (ERK1/2) in several cell systems including lung cancer (23–25). Therefore, we tested whether regulation of ILK expression by fish oil was related to p38 MAPK and ERK activation. We found that H1838 cells transfected with a wild-type ILK promoter luciferase reporter construct showed decreased promoter activity when exposed to fish oil, linoleic acid, and rosiglitazone, a synthetic PPARγ ligand, while little effect was observed in cells exposed to WY14643, a PPARα ligand (Fig. The inhibitory effect of fish oil on ILK promoter activity was abolished by the inhibitor of p38 MAPK, SB239023 (Fig. The specific bands for AP-2, Sp1, and NF-κB were attenuated by a 100-fold molar excess of unlabeled respective oligonucleotides, but were not inhibited by a mutated unlabeled AP-2, Sp1, or NF-κB oligonucleotides (mAP-2, mSp1, mNF-κB). The control siRNA had no effect. The expression of PPARγ and the effects of dietary PPARγ ligands such as fish oil on cell growth have been extensively studied in many carcinoma cell types including lung cancer (3, 7). Fish oil, which is an activator of PPARγ, contains polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) of the ω3 and ω6 family, and is believed to have anti-cancer properties (4–6). In this study, we show that fish oil inhibits human lung carcinoma cell growth through suppression of ILK gene expression suggesting that ILK represents a target for PPARγ ligands. The effect of fish oil on ILK promoter activity was blocked when the upstream portion of the ILK gene promoter containing AP-2 sites was deleted, and in cells transfected with AP-2α siRNA suggesting that AP-2α plays a critical role in mediating the effect of fish oil on ILK gene expression. This study unveils a novel mechanism by which fish oil inhibits human lung cancer cell growth. The oil-enriched medium was changed daily in order to decrease the reactions of fatty acid oxidation on cells. Polyclonal antibodies against AP-2α, β and γ were purchased from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc. Linoleic acid, antibodies against PPARγ, and other chemicals were purchased from Sigma Aldrich (St. Louis, MO) unless otherwise indicated. Western Blot analysisThe procedure was performed as previously described (15). Western Blot analysisThe procedure was performed as previously described (15). Western Blot analysisThe procedure was performed as previously described (15). The blots were washed and followed by incubation with a secondary goat antibody raised against rabbit IgG conjugated to horseradish peroxidase (1:2000, Cell Signaling, Beverly, MA). sc-29200) and control nonspecific siRNA oligonucleotides (Cat No. Briefly, oligofectamine reagent was incubated with serum–free medium for 10 min. Samples containing 200 µg proteins were precleared for 30 min with 30 µl of Protein A/G Plus-agarose (sc-2003, Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and incubated for 1 h at 4 C with the appropriate antibodies (anti-PPARγ) or normal IgG preabsorbed to Protein A/G Plus-agarose. Michalik and Desvergne at The University of Lausanne and have been reported previously (18). Michalik and Desvergne at The University of Lausanne and have been reported previously (18). The assays for firefly luciferase activity and Renilla luciferase activity were performed sequentially in a Labsystems Luminoskan Ascent luminometer equipped with dual injectors. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA)EMSA experiments were performed as described before (16). However, the mechanisms responsible for the anti-cancer effects of fish oil remain incompletely elucidated. Nuclear proteins (5 µg) were first incubated under binding conditions [10 mM HEPES, Tris-HCL (pH 7.9), 50 mM KCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 12% (vol/vol) glycerol, and 2 µg poly (dI-dC)] for 10 min, then [γ-32P] ATP probe was added for another 20 min at room temperature in a final volume of 20 µl. The same amount of mutated oligonucleotides mixed with the probe was used as another control. All of these were performed in the same binding conditions as described before. Afterwards, the protein-DNA complexes were electrophoresed on a native 4.5% polyacrylamide gel at 150 volts using 1× Tris-Glycine buffer. Note that two human bronchial epithelial cell lines (BEAS-2B and 16-HBE) showed no inhibition in response to fish oil (Fig. 1D).Since fish oil can activate nuclear receptors such as PPARγ, we examined if inhibition of ILK expression by fish oil was mediated by PPARγ. 1E, the effects of fish oil on ILK expression were eliminated in the presence of GW9662, and this was confirmed by PPARγ siRNA (Fig. Note that fish oil induced PPARγ protein expression (Fig. 