Mice were presented with a 12-second tone followed by pellet dispenser click and pellet drop (CS). The high level of AC5 expression in the striatum suggests that this isoform may be important for certain forms of striatum-dependent learning. Discriminative head entries immediately after the pellet dispenser activation and pellet drop further highlighted a significant learning curve in WT but not in AC5KO mice (Fig 2b, session X genotype interaction p<0.0001). Total head entry rate in the session did not differ between AC5KO and WT mice across days (Fig. Food and water restricted mice were trained to press one lever for a water reward and another for sucrose pellets on an RR20 schedule of reinforcement. It has been hypothesized that DA facilitates the learning of environmental contingencies by mediating plasticity mechanisms that strengthen or weaken corticostriatal inputs associated with reward delivery (Wickens et al , 1996; Schultz et al , 1997; Reynolds et al , 2001; Reynolds and Wickens, 2002; Wickens et al , 2003; Schultz, 2006). Recent studies indicate a potential role of the extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK)1/2 in the NAcc in appetitive Pavlovian learning (Shiflett et al , 2008). No significant difference in ERK1/2 phosphorylation was seen between genotypes after vehicle injection. No significant difference in ERK1/2 phosphorylation was seen between genotypes after vehicle injection. No significant D1-mediated increase in phosphorylated ERK1/2 positive neurons was seen in the dorsal striatum, consistent with published results (Gerfen et al , 2002). These data indicate that AC5 is specifically required for appetitive Pavlovian learning. The role of DA in appetitive Pavlovian conditioning has been studied extensively (Schultz, 1998; Dalley et al , 2002; Eyny and Horvitz, 2003; Day et al , 2007). Reports that either D1 or NMDA receptor antagonism can inhibit appetitive Pavlovian learning (Di Ciano et al , 2001; Eyny and Horvitz, 2003) are consistent with this view. The results presented here indicate a decoupling of D1 receptor activation from phosphorylation of ERK1/2 in the NAcc of AC5KO mice. The results presented here indicate a decoupling of D1 receptor activation from phosphorylation of ERK1/2 in the NAcc of AC5KO mice. The results presented here indicate a decoupling of D1 receptor activation from phosphorylation of ERK1/2 in the NAcc of AC5KO mice. It has been suggested that D1 regulates the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 via a cAMP-dependent regulation of DARPP-32, which inhibits protein phosphatase-1, which induces an activation of ERK1/2 (Valjent et al , 2005). It has been suggested that D1 regulates the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 via a cAMP-dependent regulation of DARPP-32, which inhibits protein phosphatase-1, which induces an activation of ERK1/2 (Valjent et al , 2005). The reward pathway is often implicated in impulsive choice behavior (Belin et al , 2008). However, previous studies have reported that lesions of the dorsomedial striatum (Yin et al , 2005) and the NAcc core (Corbit et al , 2001), areas with high AC5 expression, produce insensitivity to outcome devaluation, suggesting a role for these structures in this aspect of instrumental learning. One, DA signaling is critical to these behaviors but mediated through downstream effectors other than AC5. Although AC5KO mice show severely reduced DA receptor modulation of cAMP content, reduced D1 receptor levels in the striatum and severely diminished D1-mediated activation of ERK1/2, AC5KO mice respond robustly to D1 receptor stimulation in locomotor assays, suggesting the significance of alternative downstream signaling pathways in MSNs (Iwamoto et al , 2003). Recent studies have identified non-cAMP dependent DA receptor signaling pathways in MSNs mediating DA dependent behaviors (Beaulieu et al , 2005). Sessions ended in one hour or when mice received 30 rewards. Mice were placed in feeding cages and fed ad libitum either the reinforcer earned by lever press (sucrose pellets, devalued) or the freely available reinforcer (regular chow, valued) for one hour. The distinct neural substrates that underlie these specific forms of appetitive associative learning, however, have not been fully determined and characterized. Then, both levers were extended and food and water restricted mice were trained to press the left lever for sucrose pellet reward and the right lever for water reward for 4 days. Following two-lever training, testing for contingency was conducted for 5 days. Each trial consisted of presentation 12-s, 85-db, 2700-Hz tone (conditioned stimulus (CS)) followed by a click of the pellet dispenser and the drop of a single 20 mg sucrose pellet. Total head entry rate was calculated as total head entries in session divided by session time. A 0.33-s delay for detection of head entries was written into the program in order to reduce excessive head entry counts due to twitching of the head in the receptacle. Freezing behavior was monitored every 5 seconds, and a freezing score was calculated as total number of 5-s bins the subject was immobile divided by total 5-s bins in the session. ImmunohistochemistryFifteen minutes after injection of either vehicle (0.9% saline) or SKF 81297 (5mg/kg, Sigma), mice were perfused transcardially with 4% paraformaldehyde, and brains post-fixed overnight in 4% paraformaldehyde. Sections were first washed in 0.1M Tris buffered saline followed by blocking in 4% donkey serum and 0.1% Triton. Sections were first washed in 0.1M Tris buffered saline followed by blocking in 4% donkey serum and 0.1% Triton. Sections were first washed in 0.1M Tris buffered saline followed by blocking in 4% donkey serum and 0.1% Triton. For counting p-ERK1/2 positive neurons, six successive sections through the nucleus accumbens separated by 120 μm, beginning at approximately 1.20 mm anterior to Bregma were used for counting. Fear conditioning was analyzed using a two-way ANOVA with repeated measures design, and baseline differences were analyzed using a Student's t-test. Cell counting data was analyzed using a two-way ANOVA with repeated measures design. As the dorsal striatum and nucleus accumbens (NAcc), areas with high AC5 expression (see Supplemental Fig. Comparing the latencies between rewarded and unrewarded lever presses and checking the food receptacle indicated that WT mice discriminated the rewarded lever press from the unrewarded lever press whereas AC5KO mice did not. 