SNCEE-treated Cdc25A migrated more rapidly than decomposed SNCEE-treated Cdc25A under non-reducing conditions (Figure 1C, lane 1 vs. lane 2); addition of β-mercaptoethanol to Cdc25A prior to SDS-PAGE ablated this enhanced migration (Figure 1C, lanes 3 and 4). Figure 1D shows that preaddition of DTT before the phosphatase assay restored the majority of Cdc25A activity attenuated by SNCEE. Together, these results were consistent with a model in which a redox-sensitive modification to the Cdc25A protein structure induced by low molecular mass RSNOs inhibited Cdc25A phosphatase activity. Figure S3), indicating some specificity for Cdc25A. H2O2 also decreases Cdc25A expression in HeLa cells, although the mechanism remains unidentified (10). Cdc25A did not decrease logarithmically following SNCEE treatment; rather, Cdc25A levels appeared to be temporarily stabilized, although by 120 minutes most of the Cdc25A was lost (Figure 4A and B). We transfected HCT116 cells with vectors containing the CDC25A cDNA under the control of the CMV promoter and monitored the effect of SNCEE on Cdc25A levels. Stress-dependent global translational inhibition is mediated primarily through phosphorylation and inhibition of the translational regulator eIF2α (35). In response to various stresses, eIF2α is phosphorylated on Ser51 by stress-sensitive kinases (36). ·NO is a diatomic free radical generated by nitric oxide synthases (NOS) which acts as a signaling molecule in numerous critical cellular processes, including vasodilation, synaptic transmission, and inflammation. ·NO is a diatomic free radical generated by nitric oxide synthases (NOS) which acts as a signaling molecule in numerous critical cellular processes, including vasodilation, synaptic transmission, and inflammation. These modifications to Cdc25A could induce a migration shift by SDS-PAGE, would be reversible with DTT, and would be expected to inhibit its phosphatase activity if the catalytic cysteine were modified. Alternatively, generation of an intramolecular disulfide bond between the active site thiolate and a proximal thiol as reported for H2O2-treated Cdc25 could occur (8). Further studies will be necessary, however, to elucidate how low molecular mass RSNOs inhibit Cdc25A activity. Protein phosphatase PP5 activity is required for ATM activity (40), and PP5 is inhibited by okadaic acid (41). These data imply the traditional DNA damage pathway mediates Cdc25A loss following ·NO2 or SIN-1 treatment. These data imply the traditional DNA damage pathway mediates Cdc25A loss following ·NO2 or SIN-1 treatment. These data imply the traditional DNA damage pathway mediates Cdc25A loss following ·NO2 or SIN-1 treatment. Collectively, this work and previous studies (11) reinforce the concept that distinct RNS mediate discrete intracellular signaling. Collectively, this work and previous studies (11) reinforce the concept that distinct RNS mediate discrete intracellular signaling. Collectively, this work and previous studies (11) reinforce the concept that distinct RNS mediate discrete intracellular signaling. Figure S2B), indicating that this could be responsible for eIF2αSer51 hyperphosphorylation in response to RSNOs. Perturbations to the ER redox status either in response to reductants (44) or RNS are reported to initiate ER stress, and thus generate phospho-eIF2αSer51, presumably through activation of PERK (45). The decoupling of Cdc25A from ASK-1 may be a prerequisite for ASK-1-dependent apoptosis; thus translational suppression of Cdc25A following nitrosative stress may represent cellular priming of the apoptotic machinery. The decoupling of Cdc25A from ASK-1 may be a prerequisite for ASK-1-dependent apoptosis; thus translational suppression of Cdc25A following nitrosative stress may represent cellular priming of the apoptotic machinery. Future studies in our laboratory are centered on testing this hypothesis. S-nitrosation is a reversible modification capable of altering protein function and cell signaling. The pCMV-HA-Cdc25A plasmid encoding Cdc25A was generated by cloning the human CDC25A cDNA into the Eco R1 and Xho I sites of the pCMV-HA vector (Clontech, Mountain View, CA). All manipulations of cells, lysates, and solutions containing RSNOs were performed under subdued lighting. Medium containing DNA-lipid complexes was aspirated three hours after transfection and replaced with complete growth medium. Fluorescence microscopyCells were washed once with PBS before addition of 4% formaldehyde in PBS for 10 minutes at ambient temperature. Cells were washed twice with PBS, and nuclei were stained with 1 μg/mL Hoechst 33342 in PBS. Cdc25A is overexpressed in numerous human cancers (4) and suppresses apoptosis by binding to and inhibiting ASK-1 (5). For co-immunoprecipitation, cells were harvested in HEPES lysis buffer (5), and 1.5 mg of protein was precleared with 2 μg of normal mouse IgG followed by incubation with 50 μL of HA.11-affinity matrix (Covance) overnight at 4°C. Cdc25A phosphatase activity was measured at pH 7.4 and at ambient temperature with the artificial substrate O-methylfluorescein phosphate (OMFP) at its Km in a 96-well microtiter plate assay based on previously described methods (22). Western blots and autoradiograms were representative of at least three independent experiments. S-Nitrosothiols inhibited Cdc25A phosphatase activityThe Cdc25A catalytic cysteine is predicted to have a low pKa and exist primarily as a highly reactive thiolate anion (8, 23). As this catalytic thiolate is essential for its enzymatic activity, S-nitrosation of the Cdc25A catalytic cysteine would be expected to render the enzyme inactive. We incubated recombinant His-tagged Cdc25A with the low molecular mass RSNO SNCEE, and measured Cdc25A phosphatase activity with the artificial substrate OMFP. Figure S1). Together, these results indicate that low molecular mass RSNOs regulate the phosphatase activity of Cdc25A. 