Since ath5 acts cell-autonomously (Kay et al , 2005), we expected that donor (non-morphant) RGCs would differentiate without affecting host cells. As a receptor, Robo2’s direct effects must take place in the growth cone that expresses it, but this does not mean that indirect effects cannot affect other axons. They typically comprise thousands of axons, all with the same origin and target, and often develop over an extended period as new neurons are added. The strong effect of the host axons’ genotype on donor axon behavior shows that despite the clear importance of Slit-Robo signaling, its role in individual axons can be overridden by axon-axon interactions. It is clear from our ath5 morpholino injections that these few growth cones are not functionally pioneers, in the sense of being necessary for later axons’ guidance. Instead, we find that far more cells must be removed to prevent retinal exit: the RGCs born by 42 hpf, the critical stage (Fig. Thus, axon-axon interactions function throughout the entire course of the retinotectal projection. Interestingly, WT>ath5 morphant transplants in which host axons remained trapped within the eye tended to have fewer donor axons on the tectum (data not shown), presumably reflecting fewer donor RGCs, which might provide an insufficient level of attraction. Alternately, early-born RGCs may be close enough to find the optic nerve head, while later RGCs are simply too far away to sense it. In the zebrafish, Bak and Fraser (2003) found that pioneer and follower growth cones in the postoptic commissure (POC) display characteristic morphology and kinetics (spread/slow and narrow/fast, respectively). This allowed us to compare the relative importance of different guidance mechanisms; we conclude that axon-axon interactions can be just as important as cell-autonomous Slit-Robo signaling. As well as showing a significant role for pioneer-follower interactions, our data suggest an even more important role for peer interactions between late retinal axons. Tectal innervation appeared to be a rare event, as a large number (~5000) of transplants had to be performed; in similar experiments transplanting a few RGCs into lakritz or ath5 morphants, we also find that axons rarely reach the tectum (AJP and CBC, unpublished data). Therefore, signals from both outside the tract (guidance ligands) and within (axon-axon interactions) should act in coordination to produce the highly stereotyped, precise formation of this vertebrate axon tract. Coronal sections through 6dpf isl2b:GFP eyes after double-staining for GFP (B, E, H) and parvalbumin (Pv;C, F, I). However, in ath5 morphants (H), central RGCs do not differentiate, although later-born RGCs in the periphery differentiate normally (arrow). Dorsal views of retinotectal projection of 5dpf isl2b:gfp WT and ast larvae. Dorsal views of retinotectal projection of 5dpf isl2b:gfp WT and ast larvae. (B) In ast null mutants, eight classes of errors are commonly seen, including midline crossing at the habenular and posterior commissures, and projections to the left and right telencephalon, diencephalon, ventral hindbrain (stars). In the initial frame, dorsal is up, anterior right, medial (i.e., the back of the eye) towards the viewer. The reconstruction is rotated first around the dorsoventral axis, then the anteroposterior axis. Confocal imaging of a 42 hpf isl2b:gfp eye, stained with ToPro3 to label nuclei and dissected away from the embryo. The optic nerve is seen exiting the eye, and can be traced back to the RGCs. At ~40% through the movie, a single nonretinal GFP+ neuron (presumably from the trigeminal ganglion) can be seen at the upper right. Volume reconstruction of the 42 hpf isl2b:gfp eye, stained with ToPro3, from Supplementary Movie 2. Volume reconstruction of the 42 hpf isl2b:gfp eye, stained with ToPro3, from Supplementary Movie 2. Volume reconstruction of the 42 hpf isl2b:gfp eye, stained with ToPro3, from Supplementary Movie 2. Orientation of initial frame: dorsal up, anterior left (reversed left-right from Supplementary Movie 2). We use genetic and embryological manipulations both to remove early RGCs, and to replace them with cells lacking the Robo2 guidance receptor. MO was diluted to working concentrations with 0.1% phenol red as a marker dye, and the injected bolus measured using an eyepiece micrometer. Briefly, 1-cell donor embryos were injected with 5% rhodamine dextran (10,000 MW) as a lineage marker; at 4 hpf, 20–50 cells were transplanted to the animal pole of host embryos, which were raised to 5 dpf at 28.5°C. 6, donors were nontransgenic, while hosts were brn3c:GFP embryos injected with 5ng ath5MO. Immunofluorescence and stainingFor whole-mount immunostaining, isl2b:GFP-positive larvae were fixed at 5 or 6dpf in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS overnight at 4°C, washed in PBST (PBS with 0.1% Tween-20), dehydrated through an MeOH series, stored at −20°C for >12 hours, rehydrated, washed in PBST, permeabilized with 0.1% collagenase for 1 hour at room temperature, then incubated in the following primary antibodies overnight at 4°C: rabbit anti-GFP (1:400; Invitrogen A11122), mouse anti-GFP (1:200; Chemicon MAB3580), rabbit anti-DsRed (1:200; Clontech 632496), mouse anti-parvalbumin (1:400; Chemicon MAB1572) or affinity-purified rabbit anti-Pax2a (1:300; gift of A. Picker). Therefore, for Figures 6 and 7, we used ImageJ (http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij; developed by Wayne Rasband, NIH) and Photoshop to manually edit each z-slice and remove autofluorescence and background fluorescence, taking care always to spare nearby axons (Supplementary Figure 3). Therefore, for Figures 6 and 7, we used ImageJ (http://rsb.info.nih.gov/ij; developed by Wayne Rasband, NIH) and Photoshop to manually edit each z-slice and remove autofluorescence and background fluorescence, taking care always to spare nearby axons (Supplementary Figure 3). For cell counting, 42 hpf isl2b:gfp eyes were fixed, labeled with ToPro-3, dissected, mounted in 80% glycerol and imaged with an Olympus confocal microscope. ToPro3+, GFP+ nuclei were counted by manual inspection of each z-slice in the stack, and movies were made with Volocity software. For each chimeric larva, the presence (1 or more axons) or absence of each error was scored at 5–6 dpf by an observer blinded to genotypes, using ImageJ to examine the entire (unedited) confocal z-stack. Most recent work has focused on guidance ligands; genetic screens and biochemical purification strategies have identified many ligand/receptor pairs used by navigating growth cones (Dickson, 2002; Guan and Rao, 2003; Tessier-Lavigne and Goodman, 1996). Most recent work has focused on guidance ligands; genetic screens and biochemical purification strategies have identified many ligand/receptor pairs used by navigating growth cones (Dickson, 2002; Guan and Rao, 2003; Tessier-Lavigne and Goodman, 1996). We next injected an ath5MO dose series, monitoring RGC differentiation in live embryos from 33 to 57 hpf. In control embryos, GFP+ RGCs were always present by 33hpf. 