Initially, intestinal tissue samples must be homogenized. It is therefore not appropriate for study of intestinal colonization factors. These models include dogs (Sack et al , 1966), chinchillas (Blachman et al , 1974), guinea pigs (Freter, 1956), gnotobiotic/antibiotic treated adult mice (Miller et al , 1972; Nygren et al , 2009), zebrafish (Runft et al , 2014) and fruit flies (Blow et al , 2005). Suckling mice can be readily colonized after oro-gastric inoculation with V. cholerae and have been used to study this process, but infected animals manifest little to no overt diarrhea and thus have limited value for studying factors underlying cholera physiology. Suckling mice can be readily colonized after oro-gastric inoculation with V. cholerae and have been used to study this process, but infected animals manifest little to no overt diarrhea and thus have limited value for studying factors underlying cholera physiology. Furthermore, this surgical model requires specialized equipment and training, and the closed nature of a ligated ileal loop lacks several important aspects of GI tract physiology, e.g. When working with different litters, it is essential to change gloves in-between as the adult may reject or even attack her kits due to the foreign smell. New Zealand white rabbits are outbred, and therefore, significant variability between litters is routine. New Zealand white rabbits are outbred, and therefore, significant variability between litters is routine. New Zealand white rabbits are outbred, and therefore, significant variability between litters is routine. New Zealand white rabbits are outbred, and therefore, significant variability between litters is routine. New Zealand white rabbits are outbred, and therefore, significant variability between litters is routine. New Zealand white rabbits are outbred, and therefore, significant variability between litters is routine. Also kit size and feeding success varies within the litter. In addition, all experiments should be repeated with sufficient animals from multiple litters to correct for host differences. To obtain CFU counts that accurately reflect the bacterial loads in vivo, it is important to limit the amount of time between euthanasia, dissection, homogenization and finally CFU plating. Due to the same reasons, it is essential to avoid heating the tissue samples during their homogenization. Accompanied by the onset of diarrhea, which manifests as excretion of semi-solid fecal particles, an increase in the bacterial burden is observed and the pathogen migrates from the distal SI to re-colonize the entire gut. An experiment is entirely dependent on the delivery date of infant rabbits. Finally, the last protocol (Basic Protocol 5) gives instructions for processing the samples and determining the number of V. cholerae present. Follow all appropriate guidelines and regulations for the use and handling of pathogenic microorganisms. Typically an inoculum of 109 bacteria yields reliable results.Transfer a 200 uL aliquot of the inoculum to an eppendorf tube for CFU determination (Basic Protocol 5).Bacteria should not be left in NaHCO3 solution longer than necessary and both CFU determination as well as rabbit infection should be performed as soon as possible. Well-fed kits have a pronounced, pear-shaped body and show a ‘milk-spot’ (i.e., the milk filled stomach that is visible as a lighter region through the skin). Remove air bubbles from catheter and syringe.Hold the rabbit so that its left and right forelegs are immobilized and its head movement is restricted while the rest of its body can move freely (Fig. The bundle-forming toxin coregulated pilus (TCP) is V. cholerae’s chief colonization factor (Taylor et al , 1987), but many other gene products also facilitate the pathogen’s growth in the host intestine (Ritchie and Waldor, 2009). Inoculate the kit with 500 ul of the inoculum and place the animal back in the nesting box.How deep the catheter has to be inserted depends on the size of the kit, however ~4 cm is an average that reaches the stomach for most rabbit sizes. Inoculate the kit with 500 ul of the inoculum and place the animal back in the nesting box.How deep the catheter has to be inserted depends on the size of the kit, however ~4 cm is an average that reaches the stomach for most rabbit sizes. Do not use strong pressure while inserting the catheter and if resistance is felt, it is best to pull the catheter back a few millimeters before inserting it further. Do not use strong pressure while inserting the catheter and if resistance is felt, it is best to pull the catheter back a few millimeters before inserting it further. There is also substantial intra- and inter-litter variability in disease progression. There is also substantial intra- and inter-litter variability in disease progression. There is also substantial intra- and inter-litter variability in disease progression. There is also substantial intra- and inter-litter variability in disease progression. V. cholerae secretes cholera toxin (CT) in the intestine, and the action of this A-B5 type toxin causes the secretory diarrhea characteristic of cholera, primarily by stimulating chloride release from enterocytes into the intestinal lumen (Sears and Kaper, 1996). The animals are killed by long exposure to anesthetics that - apart from anesthetizing the animal - stops the heartbeat and breathing. The animals are killed by long exposure to anesthetics that - apart from anesthetizing the animal - stops the heartbeat and breathing. After a short incubation time (about 5 min), take out the instruments and let them dry by air.Grab the navel mark with the tissue forceps and make a small incision through the skin and peritoneal wall with the dissection scissors (Fig. Detach the gut by severing the remaining connections of connective tissue and transfer the entire tissue to a clean dissection board. 3).The amount of cecal content varies with disease progression. However, at the end stage of the disease the majority of cecal content has been excreted and very little fluid can be recovered.Disentangle the gut and align it on the dissection board.Find the beginning of the duodenum (Fig. 4E).Grab the tip of the cecum with the small angled forceps and separate the furrowed part of the cecum from the colon using scissors (Fig. 