Patients with juvenile PM were diagnosed between 1987 and 2006 and patients with muscular dystrophy were diagnosed between 1994 and 2009; all were diagnosed before age 18 years. Family history of autoimmune disease was recorded for first- and second-degree relatives. Mortality status was established using the Social Security Death Index, which was last examined in March 2011 (2). Responses to therapy were categorized as complete clinical response if there was no remaining disease activity after an adequate treatment trial, as defined in the study by Joffe et al (12), partial clinical response if there was improvement but not remission, and no clinical response if there was no clinical improvement despite an adequate treatment trial (12).Thirty-one patients were diagnosed with juvenile PM only and 8 patients were classified as having juvenile PM overlapping with a second autoimmune disease; the majority of patients have been previously reported (2). All juvenile IIM patients had a muscle biopsy sample consistent with an inflammatory myopathy; the majority of biopsy specimens were reviewed by 2 myositis researchers (LGR, FWM), often with pathologists from the Department of Neuropathology of the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, Washington, DC, or by a muscle pathologist from the Department of Pathology at George Washington University (RVJ).All patients with muscular dystrophies were initially enrolled by the treating physician as having juvenile PM, and their diagnosis was revised after review of their questionnaire data and muscle biopsy sample, followed by specialized immunohistochemical and/or genetic testing to confirm the specific diagnosis. Due to the difference in sample size between the groups, the data were resampled to ensure balance, using the method of undersampling from the larger group (15). The statistical model had 500 forests and 20,000 trees per run, and the mean decrease in accuracy (MDA) was calculated. Backward stepwise logistic regression analysis was also performed with significant variables from the univariable analysis using Stata, version 12.1. Patients with muscular dystrophy had a longer delay to diagnosis (median 12.0 months) than patients with juvenile PM (median 4.0 months) (Table 1). Mortality did not differ between the 2 groups. The frequency of abnormal values and serum muscle enzyme levels, including creatine kinase, aldolase, lactate dehydrogenase, and transaminases, and the ratio of aspartate aminotransferase to alanine aminotransferase levels did not differ between juvenile PM and muscular dystrophy patients. Patients with juvenile PM were more frequently positive for one of the myositis autoantibodies (54%), but none of the dystrophy patients had a myositis autoantibody (P = 0.003) (Table 3). Muscle atrophy on MRI of the thighs was more frequent in patients with muscular dystrophy compared to patients with juvenile PM (83% versus 19%; P = 0.008) (Table 3). However, juvenile PM and dystrophies have different biopsy characteristics, including immunopathologic features, but share some common clinical manifestations (6). Methotrexate alone was the most frequently used immunosuppressive agent in both juvenile PM patients (40%) and muscular dystrophy patients (56%). Many of the clinical and demographic features and the serum muscle enzyme levels were indistinguishable between juvenile PM and dystrophy patients. We were also unable to examine differences in the time to treatment responses because of an absence of detailed response to therapy data over time. 