Previous reports showed that apoptotic LE cells are phagocytized by trophoblast cells (El-Shershaby and Hinchliffe, 1975; Parr et al , 1987). Finally, TUNEL-positive cells were only observed after the removal of LE cells, and positive staining was only present in engulfed LE cells at 24:00 hr on day 5, suggesting that LE cells undergo cell death and nuclear disintegration after internalization by entosis. We have shown previously that LE cells begin to lose their apicobasal polarity pending blastocyst implantation (Cha et al , 2014; Daikoku et al , 2011). On day 5, the intrusive trophoblast cells take advantage of the less polarized loosened LE cells and adopt a cell-in-cell invasive behavior to engulf and internalize bordering LE cells to make contact with stromal cells. The LE cell death in oil-induced uterine lumens of pseudopregnant females in the absence of embryos also involves apoptosis that occurs much later, suggesting that LE cell death in close proximity to trophoblast cells occurs at a much more rapid pace and does involve entosis. Experimental procedures to analyze implantation sites are provided in the Supplemental Information. TSC CultureCells were maintained in a proliferative state in media (TSC media) containing 70% embryonic mouse fibroblast-cell-conditioned medium, 30% TSC medium, 25 ng/ml FGF4, and 1 μg/ml heparin, incubated in a humidified tissue culture incubator at 37°C saturated with 5% CO2 in air (Sun et al , 2010). Nonetheless, most investigators believed that LE cells enclosing the blastocyst have characteristics of apoptosis, including cellular shrinkage and nuclear fragmentation following implantation on day 5 (Parr et al , 1987; Welsh and Enders, 1993). Cell Tracker AssaysCell tracker assays were performed as previously described (Overholtzer et al , 2007) and are detailed in the Supplemental Information. The general accord was that the apoptotic LE cells are phagocytized by trophoblast cells (El-Shershaby and Hinchliffe, 1975; Parr et al , 1987). Prior to and upon initiation of blastocyst attachment, changes in gene expression are observed in both LE and stromal cells encircling the blastocyst, suggesting blastocyst-uterine interactions (Das et al , 1994; Lim et al , 1997). In contrast, in the evening of day 5 (18:00–20:00 hr), multiple gaps within the LE lining the lateral sides of the crypt were noted with the remaining epithelial cells showing an uneven apical alignment, indicative of decreased apicobasal cell polarity (Figure 1A). Removal of LE Cells in Direct Contact with the Trophoblast Cells Is Independent of Caspase 3 ActivationPrevious studies have suggested that maternal responses to implantation prompt LE cells in the implantation chamber to undergo apoptosis and that cell corpses are then endocytosed by trophoblast cells (Parr et al , 1987; Welsh and Enders, 1993). Cells undergoing apoptosis ultimately show DNA fragmentation, which can be detected by the TUNEL assay (Negoescu et al , 1996). Trophoblast Cells Engulf LE Cells in the Evening of Day 5To further explore the mechanism of disappearance of the LE barrier, we demarcated the LE and trophoblast cells by immunofluorescence of CK8 and junctional protein ZO-1. We found that the engulfed LE cells are encircled by LAMP1, suggesting that the engulfed cell is within a lysosome (white arrow head in Figure 3C).Previous studies have shown that neutrophils and monocytes are present close to the implantation chamber at the beginning of implantation (McMaster et al , 1993). These results provide evidence that the demise of LE cells in the “pseudo-chamber” is delayed in the absence of an embryo, and the mechanism of LE cell death is different within the pseudopregnant versus pregnant uterus; i.e., the pseudopregnant LE cells after oil infusion undergo apoptosis by the activation of caspase 3 as opposed to entosis during normal implantation. Similar to earlier evidence that MCF7 cells can engulf live cells by entosis (Overholtzer et al , 2007), we also observed internalization of LE cells within trophoblast cells, supporting our hypothesis that trophoblast cells remove the surrounding LE cell barrier by entosis during implantation, and this on-time elimination of the LE barrier is critical to normal implantation. To make the in vitro condition closer to a physiological setting, we repeated the experiments by replacing TSCs with blastocysts, which were collected by flushing uteri from Rosa-Tomato reporter mice on day 4 of pregnancy. Inhibition of ROCK Impedes the Process of Entosis during ImplantationThere is evidence that small GTPase ROCK is required for entosis (Overholtzer et al , 2007). 