5 shows that, for both Group I and Group II tests, the impact duration (i.e., the time that the impactor is in contact with the helmet shell, or the impact force is greater than zero), is approximately 22 ms, and it is nearly independent of the drop height and the addition of the air bubble cushioning liner. The acceleration results for the helmets equipped with an air bubble cushioning liner (Group II) did not have these sharp acceleration peaks for the entire range of drop heights. ANSI Z89.1 standard requires a top impact dropping with an impactor of 3.6 kg at a velocity of 5.5 m/s, which is approximately equivalent to a drop height of 1.73 m for our drop tower tester (Fig. Our results show that the off-the-shelf helmet model selected in the current study passes ANSI Z89.1, which requires the transmitted peak force to be less than 4.45 kN. However, the selected helmet model fails to pass EN14052 – European standard for high-performance industrial helmets, in which the helmet will be tested with an impactor of 5.0 kg from a drop height of 2.04 m; the maximal force transmitted to the helmet shall be less than 5.0 kN. None of the current industrial helmet designs has applied air bubble cushions in the suspension system. Air cushions have the advantages of light weight, low cost, and unique mechanical performance, compared with other conventional shock absorption materials, such as rubbers and polymers. Air cushions have the advantages of light weight, low cost, and unique mechanical performance, compared with other conventional shock absorption materials, such as rubbers and polymers. In summary, in the current study we found that adding air bubble cushioning liner to a basic Type I construction helmet will substantially increase the shock absorption performance for large impacts. The current study represents the first to use air bubble cushioning in the helmet suspension systems. Air cushioned soles have been used in shoes to improve shock absorption performance and comfort for decades [10]. The dependence of the contact stiffness of an air-cushioned glove on the air pressure and bubble sheet materials have been analyzed theoretically [13]. The dependence of the contact stiffness of an air-cushioned glove on the air pressure and bubble sheet materials have been analyzed theoretically [13]. Air cushion seats have been applied to improve the interface contact pressure distributions on the human body [16]. Despite widespread adoption of air bubble cushions in ergonomic designs and in commercial packaging as shock absorption materials, air bubble cushions have never been used in industrial or construction helmets. The purpose of the current study was to test if air bubble cushions can be used to improve the shock absorption performance in Type I construction helmets. Many epidemiological studies suggest that work-related traumatic brain injuries (WrTBIs) are one of the most serious occupational injuries among construction workers [2, 3, 4]. Helmet impact tests were performed according to the Type I impact protocol in ANSI Z89.1 standard (ANSI/ISEA Z89.1, 2014): a free-fall impactor drops onto a fixed helmet [20]. The impactor had a mass of 3.6 kg and was free-dropped from different heights from 2.00 ft (0.61 m) to 6.34 ft (1.86 m), which resulted in estimated impact velocities from 3.40 m/s to 6.04 m/s at a frictionless condition. The velocity of the impactor immediately before impact was measured via an optical sensor built in the system. The selected range of the drop heights are relevant to the specified test condition of Type I impact in ANSI Z89.1, in which the drop impactor is required to reach a velocity of 5.5 m/s immediate before impact, which is estimated to be equivalent to a drop height of 1.54 m for a frictionless condition.Before data collection, a pre-condition process was performed for each of the helmets [21]. where Fmax, no−air and Fmax, air are the mean peak forces for test Group I (off-the-shelf helmets) and Group II (helmets with added air bubble cushioning liner), respectively.If the data collected from the test Group I are independent of those collected from test Group II, the standard deviation of the impact force reduction ratio, Sη, is estimated by the Taylor approximation [22]: 