Cell proliferation assays with BrdU demonstrated that ablation of the short AR isoforms specifically inhibited the ability of 22Rv1 cells to proliferate in the absence of androgens (Fig. These findings suggest that AREx3dup specifically mediates the growth of 22Rv1 cells in response to androgens, while the short AR isoforms specifically promote the androgen-independent proliferation of 22Rv1 cells. These findings suggest that AREx3dup specifically mediates the growth of 22Rv1 cells in response to androgens, while the short AR isoforms specifically promote the androgen-independent proliferation of 22Rv1 cells. These findings suggest that AREx3dup specifically mediates the growth of 22Rv1 cells in response to androgens, while the short AR isoforms specifically promote the androgen-independent proliferation of 22Rv1 cells. These findings suggest that AREx3dup specifically mediates the growth of 22Rv1 cells in response to androgens, while the short AR isoforms specifically promote the androgen-independent proliferation of 22Rv1 cells. AF-2 maps to a ligand-induced coactivator binding pocket, which is structurally conserved among steroid receptors (6). An mRNA consisting of Exons 1/2/3/2b would only exist in cells such as 22Rv1, where Exon 3 has been duplicated within the AR locus. To confirm that mRNAs harboring Exon 2b gave rise to the short AR isoforms observed in 22Rv1 cells (hereafter referred to as AR1/2/2b and AR1/2/3/2b), we designed two separate siRNAs targeted to AR Exon 2b. As expected, these siRNAs knocked down the expression of AR1/2/2b and AR1/2/3/2b, but did not affect the expression of AREx3dup (Fig. Expression of either AR1/2/2b or AR1/2/3/2b induced strong activation of these reporters in the absence of androgens. As expected, androgen-refractory 22Rv1 cells expressed higher amounts of Exon 2b-containing mRNAs than androgen-dependent LNCaP, VCaP, or LAPC4 cells (Fig. We have shown that androgen-refractory PCa cells may circumvent androgen ablation through an aberrant, NTD-dependent, but CTD-independent mode of AR activity (10, 11). We have shown that androgen-refractory PCa cells may circumvent androgen ablation through an aberrant, NTD-dependent, but CTD-independent mode of AR activity (10, 11). Of these androgen-dependent cell lines, VCaP cells expressed the highest level of both full-length AR and AR Exon 1/2/2b mRNAs (Fig. To test whether expression of AR1/2/2b might be increased during PCa progression, we employed the LuCaP 23.1 and LuCaP 35 xenograft models. LuCaP 23.1 and 35 tumors grow in intact immunocompromised mice, and serve as an accurate model of androgen- and AR-dependent (AD) PCa (16, 17). For example LuCaP 23.1 and 35 tumors regress following castration, but eventually recur in an AR-dependent, but androgen-refractory manner. AD samples for both LuCaP 23.1 and 35 tumors (Fig. Various mechanisms of resistance to androgen ablation therapy have been proposed and demonstrated in various models of PCa progression. AR mRNA in 22Rv1 cells contains a duplication of Exon 3, which results in a larger AR protein (hereafter referred to as AREx3dup), consisting of 3 zinc fingers in its DBD (14). AR Exon 2b spliced after Exon 2 or Exon 3 gives rise to protein species possessing the entire AR NTD fused to the first zinc finger of the AR DBD (termed AREx1/2/2b), or the entire AR NTD fused to the complete AR DBD (termed AREx1/2/3/2b), respectively. Antibody mapping has demonstrated that this short AR isoform lacks most or all of the AR CTD, but retains an intact NTD and DBD (14). AD xenografts were propagated in Balb/c nu/nu mice and AI xenografts were propagated in SCID mice as described (16, 17). The same strategy was used to generate AREx1/2/2b, but in this case the mutagenic primers used were FW: 5′-GAAGCAGGGATGACTCTAGAAGCCCGGAAGCTGAAG and RV: 5′-CTTCAGCTTCCGGGCTTCTAGAGTCATCCCTGCTTC and oligonucleotides used for cassette generation were FW: 5′-CTAGGAGGATTTTTCAGAATGAACAAATTAAAAGAATCATAAT and RV: 5′-CTAGATTATGATTCTTTTAATTTGTTCATTCTGAAAAATCCTC. At 24 hours post-transfection, medium was replaced with serum-free, phenol red-free RPMI with 1nM mibolerone (Biomol) or vehicle. Cells were harvested after an additional 24 hours in a lysis buffer provided with a Dual Luciferase Assay Kit (Promega). Cells were harvested after an additional 24 hours in a lysis buffer provided with a Dual Luciferase Assay Kit (Promega). However, PCa invariably recurs in a fatal manifestation that is resistant to androgen ablation as well as further treatments. However, PCa invariably recurs in a fatal manifestation that is resistant to androgen ablation as well as further treatments. Following 24h growth, medium was replaced with RPMI 1640 + 5% CSS containing 1nM DHT (Sigma) or vehicle. Following 24h growth, medium was replaced with RPMI 1640 + 5% CSS containing 1nM DHT (Sigma) or vehicle. Cell proliferation assays were performed using the exact same approach; BrdU incorporation was measured 24h after DHT/vehicle treatment using a Cell Proliferation Assay Kit (Promega) via manufacturer specifications. Cell proliferation assays were performed using the exact same approach; BrdU incorporation was measured 24h after DHT/vehicle treatment using a Cell Proliferation Assay Kit (Promega) via manufacturer specifications. Cell proliferation assays were performed using the exact same approach; BrdU incorporation was measured 24h after DHT/vehicle treatment using a Cell Proliferation Assay Kit (Promega) via manufacturer specifications. Moreover, these experiments demonstrated that the previously described short AR isoform (14) occurs as a doublet. In line with RT-PCR and reporter gene assays (Fig. 1), ablation of AREx3dup inhibited androgen-dependent, but not androgen-independent 22Rv1 growth (Fig. 