2 and 3 present the kinematic viscosity and density values obtained for each material. Although there was no statistically significant difference in viscosity between the GSNO emulsion and a control lacking GSNO and hyaluronic acid, the density decreased with inclusion of these components (Table S1).The physicochemical properties of dermal products determine their viscosity (ŋ), and modulate the magnitude of diffusion coefficient (D) as expressed by the Einstein-Smoluchowski equation (D = kT/6πrŋ). Using the density of the emulsions presented in Table S1, the viscosity can be converted to Pa•s for comparison. The results obtained from the analyses are shown in Table S2. 3.3Chemiluminescence-based NO analysisPrevious reports have demonstrated that different physiological responses are observed at particular instantaneous NO concentrations. At a concentration of 1.72 % w/w, the NO release calculated for 53 h at physiological temperature was 46 ± 4 μmol g−1 and the total NO content was 58 ± 8 μmol g−1. This heating process causes GSNO to undergo NO-forming decay according to the kinetics illustrated in Fig. This heating process causes GSNO to undergo NO-forming decay according to the kinetics illustrated in Fig. In particular, inclusion of an NO donor within a viscous emulsion would facilitate topical application and permit combination with other therapeutic additives. The slower NO release observed afterward may provide NO at a level that supports cell proliferation, while avoiding cell apoptosis.24,51Using the density of the S-nitrosated emulsion and its instantaneous NO release, it can be calculated that at the later stages of NO release, when the signal has plateaued after 49 h, the instantaneous NO release is 123 pmol g−1, which is equivalent to 92.3 nM. At 53 h the instantaneous release is 53.7 pmol g−1, which is equivalent to 40 nM. Characteristic RSNO absorption peaks were observed at 339 ± 1.5 (π → π*) and 546 ± 0.6 nm (nN → π*). Future studies will include cell assays to provide insight regarding cell proliferation, apoptosis, and morphology. Future studies will include cell assays to provide insight regarding cell proliferation, apoptosis, and morphology. Future studies will include cell assays to provide insight regarding cell proliferation, apoptosis, and morphology. Future studies will include cell assays to provide insight regarding cell proliferation, apoptosis, and morphology. Additionally, the pH was measured over 12 weeks to investigate the stability of the S-nitrosated emulsion. The formulation is the first to report the combination of nitric oxide, vitamin E, and hyaluronic acid in an emulsion intended for topical use. 2.1MaterialsDL-α-Tocopheryl acetate (Vitamin E; 97%), n-propyl-4-hydroxybenzoate (99%), methyl 4-hydroxybenzoate (99%), 1-hexadecanol (98%), isopropyl tetradecanoate (98%), and triethanolamine (>98%) were purchased from Alfa Aesar (Ward Hill, MA, USA). Glyceryl stearate SE (self emulsifying: glyceryl monostearate with 3–6% potassium stearate) and carbomer 980 QD were procured from MakingCosmetics Inc (Snoqualmie, WA, USA). Adult human dermal fibroblasts (lot # 80616174) were purchased and maintained with fibroblast basal medium (FBM) (lot # 80921174) supplemented with fibroblast growth kit – low serum (lot # 80712184) and penicillin-streptomycin-amphotericin B (lot # 80118182) purchased from American Type Culture Collection (Manassas, VA, USA). Trypan Blue Solution (lot #RNBD1973) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Dilutions for pH tests were prepared using ultrapure water to make 11.1% w/v solutions at room temperature. Common NO donors include S-nitrosothiols (RSNOs), N-diazeniumdiolates (NONOates), and inorganic nitrite.7,14–16 Formulations incorporating these NO donors have demonstrated considerable promise in topical applications. Common NO donors include S-nitrosothiols (RSNOs), N-diazeniumdiolates (NONOates), and inorganic nitrite.7,14–16 Formulations incorporating these NO donors have demonstrated considerable promise in topical applications. Common NO donors include S-nitrosothiols (RSNOs), N-diazeniumdiolates (NONOates), and inorganic nitrite.7,14–16 Formulations incorporating these NO donors have demonstrated considerable promise in topical applications. The NO emission from this process was used to quantify the thermally and photo-releasable NO present in each material. NO release was measured for 53 h in vessels protected from direct exposure to light to prevent further photodecomposition of the RSNO. For the aqueous phase, a 2% w/v solution of carbomer 980 QD was prepared in ultrapure water at room temperature 24 h prior to the emulsification. The following day, ultrapure water was heated to 75 °C and 79.7 mL was added to glycerol (3 g), triethanolamine (0.9 g), methyl 4-hydroxybenzoate (0.1 g), and carbomer 980 QD 2 % w/v in ultrapure water (5 g). The white emulsion was transferred to a glass container with a cap and stored at room temperature shielded from direct exposure to light.Synthesis and characterization of S-nitrosoglutathione.S-nitrosoglutathione (GSNO), the NO donor in this study, was synthesized based on a previously reported method.34 Briefly, a mixture of 5 mmol of reduced glutathione (GSH), 8 mL of cold Millipore water, and 2.5 mL of 2 M hydrochloric acid (HCl) was stirred over ice for 10 min, followed by adding 5 mmol of sodium nitrite (NaNO2) into this solution to initiate S-nitrosation. The process was followed by the addition of GSNO (88.4 mg) to obtain a 1.72 % w/w concentration. The mixture was alternately vortexed for 2 min and stirred at 1100 rpm for 4 min over the course of 1 h. The samples were stored at 4 °C until further use. Glycerol was included as a humectant that functions to attract water and draw additional moisture into the epidermis,36 while methyl 4-hydroxybenzoate was added as a preservative. This phase of the lotion moisturizes because of the added occlusive agents isopropyl tetradecanoate and mineral oil. 