We have found that uptake of TRP is significantly increased in CR cells. We have found that uptake of TRP is significantly increased in CR cells. We have previously shown that all our CR cells possess higher ROS as well as superoxide dismutase (SOD) expression and activities (Wangpaichitr et al , 2009). We reviewed a large publicly available database of lung cancer patients for survival data of those with high expression of IDO since it is a suggested predictor for poor prognosis (Liu et al , 2016; Schalper et al , 2017; Theate et al , 2015) and is often found in late stage lung cancer. Importantly, using IDO expression as a biomarker still remains controversial since studies have shown no significant correlation between IDO expression and clinic-pathological parameters (Ferdinande et al , 2012; Gao et al , 2009; Karanikas et al , 2007). We firmly believe that regulation of ROS and the kynurenine pathway could be influenced by interactions with viral pathogens and should be considered during development of novel antiviral drugs and therapies. We firmly believe that regulation of ROS and the kynurenine pathway could be influenced by interactions with viral pathogens and should be considered during development of novel antiviral drugs and therapies. Thus, there are a large number of patients who require other therapy and may be more at risk for SARS-CoV-2 infection and subsequent severe disease. These novel findings can lead to new care plans for these patients by targeting tumor metabolism. Importantly, we believe that various tumor metabolic characteristics may be applied to screen for patients susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection. Covid-19/ SARS-CoV-2 airway mediated infection has increased lethality in immunocompromised patients, and many US hospitals are being flooded positive inpatients at this time. Currently, the impact of tumor metabolism on the tumor microenvironment is not well established and any correlation of SARS-COV-2 infection is unknown. Consequently, this microenvironment is deprived of amino acids, thus creating an additional unfavorable condition for the viability of cytotoxic effector T-cells which are highly anabolic and require high amounts of amino acids for growth (Fox, Hammerman, & Thompson, 2005; Jones & Thompson, 2007). Some studies have reported a differential decline in CD4 and CD8, and increased programmed cell death protein 1 [PD1], cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 [CTLA4], and decreased intracellular gamma-interferon) and inflammatory cytokines (Qin et al , 2020). Patients who recovered from COVID-19 syndrome have evidence of humoral neutralizing antibodies (Walls et al , 2020),and SARS-CoV-2 specific T-cells, again showing the potential role of T-cells reported thus far is characterizing the immune responses against this virus. Hence, an additional gap exists that must be addressed via the evaluation of SARS-CoV-2 related signaling in lung cancer in order to guide future care plans and screening strategies. Hence, an additional gap exists that must be addressed via the evaluation of SARS-CoV-2 related signaling in lung cancer in order to guide future care plans and screening strategies. It appears extremely likely that tumor residing T-regs contribute to the lack of a spontaneous immune response to the tumor in NSCLC patients. In fact, effector T-cells (T-efi) rely on glycolysis to expand and this growth is greatly dependent on HIF1α (Doedens et al , 2013). In fact, effector T-cells (T-efi) rely on glycolysis to expand and this growth is greatly dependent on HIF1α (Doedens et al , 2013). Furthermore, mice deficient in HIF1α fail to mount a strong T-cell response and have increased T-reg populations (Dang et al , 2011; L. Z. Shi et al , 2011). We previously dissected the underlying mechanism(s) that prevent the detection and potential elimination of CR tumors by immune surveillance and consequent immune response. Furthermore, higher expression of TGFβ, a well-known immunosuppressive cytokine that is released by T-reg (M. L. Chen et al , 2005) and has been shown to activate indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1) biosynthesis (Mbongue et al , 2015; Y. Shi & Massague, 2003). Interestingly, many reports have recently shown that that FoxP3 mRNA as well as protein can be detected in various cancer types including lung cancer (G. Y. Chen et al , 2008; Karanikas et al , 2008). While L-tryptophan (TRP) is an essential amino acid, required for protein synthesis, the catabolism of TRP generates KYN via the KP. 