A method that would enable not only the non-selective identification of the P450 enzymes present in diseased tissue, but also the quantification of expression levels relative to that of surrounding normal tissue, would provide invaluable information regarding the metabolic fate of the selected drugs and hence the outcome of therapy. Mass chromatograms were constructed and the spectra averaged at half peak height (unless interfering peaks were present, in which case spectra were averaged from the part of the peak where interferences were absent). These techniques have significant limitations: not only do they require pre-selection of the P450 enzymes to be investigated, so that if an unknown or unexpected P450 were present in a sample it would be overlooked, but they are unable to provide reliable quantitative information. For these cases the question arises as to whether it is appropriate to make the corrections described above. In order to assess this, uncorrected mean ratios and corresponding standard deviations for the P450s quantified in the validation experiments and in the mouse liver forward and reverse labeling experiments were calculated and compared statistically with the corrected ratios using the variance ratio F-test and Student's two-sampled t-test. It was therefore concluded that the corrections described above were unnecessary. Student's t-tests were performed in order to assess the probability that the population mean ratio for the experimental values is equal to the theoretical mean ratio. The standard deviations for all measurements are less than 0.1 (seven of the ten P450s have standard deviations of less than 0.05), which indicates a high degree of precision. Given the multi-step procedure employed, these figures indicate that the technique is reliable and reproducible for the relative quantification of P450s from SDS-PAGE gels. Given the multi-step procedure employed, these figures indicate that the technique is reliable and reproducible for the relative quantification of P450s from SDS-PAGE gels. Given the multi-step procedure employed, these figures indicate that the technique is reliable and reproducible for the relative quantification of P450s from SDS-PAGE gels. Animal models, in which human tumors are grown on immune-deficient mice, have been widely used to evaluate the response of human tumors to anticancer drugs. Animal models, in which human tumors are grown on immune-deficient mice, have been widely used to evaluate the response of human tumors to anticancer drugs. We have demonstrated in a separate study on these mouse liver microsomes that P450s are exclusively identified in the 45 – 62 kDa molecular weight range. The reverse labeling experiment was also performed in which peptides from the control sample were labeled with 18O. Strong up-regulation of CYP2B10 mRNA and protein expression after TCPOBOP treatment is well-documented24-26; our results show an up-regulation of 17-fold (Table 3). These values can be explained as follows: the P450 molecular weight region of the SDS-PAGE gel was cut into several pairs of bands for analysis (Figure 5); each one of these gel slices contained many proteins. It was not possible to distinguish between CYP2A4 and CYP2A5, and so this could be the cause of the apparent discrepancy between the two labeling experiments. Jenkins et al​31 used ICAT reagents for relative and absolute quantification of hepatic P450s induced in response to phenobarbital or 3-methylcholanthrate. Jenkins et al​31 used ICAT reagents for relative and absolute quantification of hepatic P450s induced in response to phenobarbital or 3-methylcholanthrate. This is not an ideal approach to differentiate between isozymes with a high degree of amino acid sequence similarity, such as P450 subfamily members. The technique has exquisite discriminatory powers, allowing distinction between such highly homologous isozymes as CYP2B10 and CYP2B20 (87% sequence identity). The technique has exquisite discriminatory powers, allowing distinction between such highly homologous isozymes as CYP2B10 and CYP2B20 (87% sequence identity). The method has been successfully applied to the analysis of differential P450 expression in the livers of control and TCPOBOP-treated mice grafted with human tumors. Changes in liver P450 expression after treatment with TCPOBOP are consistent with those found in the literature. Changes in liver P450 expression after treatment with TCPOBOP are consistent with those found in the literature. Changes in liver P450 expression after treatment with TCPOBOP are consistent with those found in the literature. The iTRAQ approach (when performed on the peptide level) is not compatible with the use of gel electrophoresis because the peptide-reactive group utilized in the tagging chemistry also reacts with other amine-containing moieties (for example, acrylamide, Tris buffer, ammonium bicarbonate). The efficiency of the labeling reaction was assessed using recombinant CYP3A4 applied to SDS-PAGE gels. Although we saw no evidence of this in the current study, in future work we will exploit 18O labeling to asses the induction of P450s in these mice in response to a panel of other P450 inducing agents. Two labeling experiments were performed; in the first (forward labeling) experiment the treated sample was labeled with 18O, and in the second (reverse labeling) experiment the untreated sample was labeled with 18O. Two labeling experiments were performed; in the first (forward labeling) experiment the treated sample was labeled with 18O, and in the second (reverse labeling) experiment the untreated sample was labeled with 18O. Finally, the proteomic results for two CYP proteins, one found to be up-regulated by TCPOBOP and the other down-regulated, were confirmed by Western blot analysis. The resultant microsomal pellet was suspended in buffer containing 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 15% glycerol, 1 mM EDTA and one Complete protease inhibitor tablet per 50 ml buffer, and then centrifuged again at 180,000 g for 1 h. The final pellet was suspended in buffer containing 0.1 M Tris-HCl (pH 7.4), 15% glycerol, 1 mM EDTA and one Complete protease inhibitor tablet per 50 ml, and stored at −80 °C. Sufficient trypsin solution was added to swell the gel pieces, which were kept on ice for 30 min and then covered with 50 mM ammonium bicarbonate and incubated at 37 °C overnight. The trypsin was centrifuged between washes at 6000 g, and finally re-suspended in 10 μl trypsin buffer per sample. Immobilized trypsin (10 μl per sample) was added to the extracted peptides and the mixture dried completely in a SpeedVac. Samples were centrifuged at 14,000 g to allow removal of the immobilized trypsin, dried to approximately 5 μl in a SpeedVac, and stored at −80 °C. Three min after sample loading the proportion of solvent B was increased linearly to 35% over 37 min, then to 90% over 5 min; maintained at 90% solvent B for 7 min (wash phase) then re-equilibrated at 96% solvent A, 4% solvent B for 11 min. 