Furthermore, competition for available resources also occurs between sibling colonies of the same strain of bacteria, indicating that under conditions of limited nutrients, bacteria can resort to cannibalism to survive.18 Considering the role of multi-species biofilms in disease and the inherent differences in virulence among strains of the same bacteria, it is pivotal to understand the complex inter-species and inter-strain interactions between microbial biofilm community members to elucidate the underlying mechanisms implicated in virulence, pathogenesis, and disease progression.In an early demonstration of the potential utility of chemical imaging to understand inter-species interaction (vide infra), Moree et al  analyzed colonies of P. aeruginosa and the pathogenic fungus Aspergillus fumigatus cultured side-by-side on the same agar plate using matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization Fourier-transform ion cyclotron resonance mass spectrometry imaging (MALDI-FTICR MSI).13 The resultant maps of the secretome showed that phenazine metabolites produced by P. aeruginosa are transformed by A. fumigatus into other compounds possessing different chemical properties. Given that pathogens like P. aeruginosa, Staphylococcus aureus, and others can infect multiple host cell types, it is critically important that we better understand how the biosecretome of these pathogenic bacteria evolves as they exert dominance.Multimodal chemical imaging – an innovative set of experiments that target the spatial and temporal organization of chemical signaling in microbial communities – constitutes a radical new approach to understanding microbial behavior that addresses the fundamental dichotomy between the spatially heterogeneous way that microbial cells exist and function in nature, and the principal laboratory tools that are used to study them - tools that largely rely on homogenizing bacterial cultures.19–30 Initial efforts to realize the potential of this approach in our laboratories have addressed three primary areas. At present, this result remains unexplained, however PAK remains motile even when co-cultured in the presence of an S. aureus agr-QS mutant, which lacks the gene to produce the only known S. aureus surfactant. These results clearly indicate the upregulation of a motility-inducing factor in the presence of S. aureus, thus illustrating the complexity of interspecies interactions and highlighting the need for a spatial mapping of secreted biomolecular signals.As a model system to explore the application of CRM to detailed studies of bacterial co-cultures, we started with the interactions of P. aeruginosa PAO1C co-cultured with E.coli DH5α. The CRM microspectra are sufficiently strong to render strong, assignable features in the loading plot, Figure 5(b). The inter-cellular signaling process known as quorum sensing (QS) plays an important role in biofilm formation and development, both critical to the establishment of an infection. For example, even at the level of different strains within the same species, P. aeruginosa exhibits highly variable QS networks.7 For example, QS activation of virulence factors was recently shown to act not just upon localized communities after reaching a QS density threshold, but QS signals were additionally shown to influence the size of the community as well as the phenotype of other regional bacteria.8 Further highlighting the inter-connected web of chemical relationships that determine bacterial behavior, Shrout and coworkers showed that nutritional and surface conditions can strongly influence QS-mediated activity, by regulating factors that guide biofilm development.9–11 While it is widely appreciated that QS is important to multi-species interactions,12 it is not currently possible to predict how specific bacterial strains use QS to guide their development into niches, for example those that cause infection.7 This realization disputes the notion that pathogenic differences among strains are easily explained by the presence or absence of one or a few virulence proteins, or that the response to exogenous agents, like antibiotics, is linear. 