Dorzolamide was encapsulated in PEG3-PSA polymer at a higher level (3.9%) than in PLGA; however, the highest drug loading was obtained when the free base forms of dorzolamide (14.9%, 9.7 ± 2.7 μm in diameter) and brinzolamide (15.8%, 11.7 ± 3.2 μm in diameter) were encapsulated in PEG3-PSA (Figure 1). In Vivo BiosafetyRabbits showed no clinical signs of discomfort after subconjunctival injection of microparticles. In Vivo BiosafetyRabbits showed no clinical signs of discomfort after subconjunctival injection of microparticles. Rabbits did not demonstrate signs of ocular discomfort at any point after particle injection. Thus, PEG3-PSA particle fluorescence was similar in time course to the IOP lowering effect seen with dorzolamide microparticles. Initial attempts to encapsulate dorzolamide into PLGA microparticles yielded insufficient drug loading (0.5%) that was modestly improved by ion pairing dorzolamide with SDS (0.8%) and SO (1.5%). Topical CAIs require multiple daily doses and can cause irritation and blurriness on instillation. Topical formulations utilizing hydrogels, micelles, nanocrystals, biodegradable nanoparticles, and dendrimers decrease the number of daily drops that need to be given.25–30 While transitioning topical CAIs from drops that must be given two or three times a day to a drop that only needs to be given once a day could positively impact patient adherence, it does not eliminate the issue of poor patient adherence.31 Biodegradable implants are able to extend CAI release for several months. It is likely that multiple, controlled release treatment options will be needed to adequately meet clinical needs of glaucoma treatment. It is likely that multiple, controlled release treatment options will be needed to adequately meet clinical needs of glaucoma treatment. It is likely that multiple, controlled release treatment options will be needed to adequately meet clinical needs of glaucoma treatment. Dorzolamide is a more hydrophilic compound than doxorubicin, therefore drug release from DPP could occur more rapidly in vivo than from PEG3-PSA-Dox particles. Near complete inhibition of carbonic anhydrase is needed for IOP reduction by CAIs.45 It is likely that as the particles near complete degradation, this threshold of enzymatic inhibition is passed and IOP reduction does not occur. Isoforms II, III, IV, and XII are present in the ciliary processes of the eye,11 where CA II and CA XII are involved in aqueous humor production11 and regulation of IOP. Becker et al  first showed that the systemic CA inhibitor (CAI) acetazolamide reduced IOP by 30%.12 Systemic CAIs are used to treat severe glaucoma; however, side effects are frequently severe and include rare but fatal aplastic anemia. Molecular weight was monitored by gel permeation chromatography (JASCO AS-1555, Tokyo, Japan) with three columns in series (Waters, Milford, MA; Styragel guard column, 4.6 mm i.d. Ion Pair and Microparticle PreparationDorzolamide ion pairs were created by dissolving 7.5 mg of dorzolamide in 1 mL of water. The SDS or SO solution was then added in a dropwise manner to the dorzolamide solution. Triethylamine (TEA) was added to the PEG3-PSA mixture, and all mixtures were homogenized (L4RT, Silverson Machines, East Longmeadow, MA) at 6,000 rpm for 1 min into 100 mL of an aqueous solution containing 1% poly(vinyl alcohol) (25 kDa, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). Particles were hardened by allowing dichloromethane to evaporate at room temperature, while stirring for 2 h. Particles were then collected and washed three times with double distilled water via centrifugation at 6000g for 10 min (International Equipment Co., Needham Heights, MA). The needle was connected to a manometer (DigiMano1000, Netech, Farmingdale, NY) and reservoir containing balanced salt solution (BSS). Measurements were made for manometer readings between 4 and 24 mmHg. Daily use of eye drops reduces vision loss due to glaucoma, but its success is hindered by poor patient adherence, preservative and medication toxicity, and limited bioavailability. In the Travatan Dosing Aid Study, nearly half of the patients used their drops less than 75% of the time,7 as judged by an electronic monitoring device. The TonoVet was used according to the manufacturer’s instructions with the magnetic probe in a horizontal position. All measurements occurred between 10 a.m. and 12 p.m., were performed by the same technician, and took place in the rabbit housing room. Prior to measurements, each rabbit was restrained for at least 3 min. If there was more than 2 mmHg of variation between measurements of an individual eye, the rabbit was allowed to acclimate for 3 more minutes before repeat measurement. Following enucleation, eyes were exposed to a sucrose gradient and frozen in optimal cutting temperature compound (Sakura Finetek, Torrance, CA) and serially cut into sections of 10 μm thickness. Total fluorescence at the injection site was recorded at 500/600 nm, and images were analyzed using Living Image 3.0 software (Caliper Lifesciences, Inc.). Statistical AnalysisAll values are mean ± standard deviation (SD). The disincentives to ideal eye drop adherence include the fact that they provide no detectable benefit to the patient in terms of symptom relief. Dunnett’s test (α = 0.05) was performed to determine statistical significance for individual time points. Area under the curve (AUC) as calculated using the trapezoid rule and statistical significance was calculated using paired t test. Preparation and Characterization of MicroparticlesDorzolamide and brinzolamide are hydrophilic compounds that were resistant to encapsulation into PLGA, with loading of 0.5% (10.9 ± 5.3 μm in diameter) and 1.8% (9.7 ± 2.7 μm in diameter) by weight on initial attempts, respectively (Table 1). 