One section of the questionnaire asked respondents where they were hospitalized; how they first notified Vimo SEWA that they had a claim to submit; whether their claim had been approved; and whether they had received reimbursement before their discharge from hospital. The results are described using simple proportions, without any statistical testing. A test for comparing paired proportions would be more appropriate for a pre-test–post-test study27 but this was not possible, given the data limitations.A separate section of the questionnaire assessed household socioeconomic status (SES). For the sample of the general rural population, the index was specified such that it had a zero mean and standard deviation equal to one. These interviews were conducted in December 2004 and between June and September 2005. These interviews were conducted in December 2004 and between June and September 2005. We also conducted 5 focus group discussions (FGDs) with aagewans from all 8 of the subdistricts in December 2004. All of the qualitative interviews were conducted in Gujarati and were video-recorded, with the permission of the participants. The interviews and FGDs were later translated into English, transcribed by the interviewers, and coded in MicrosoftWord. Interviewer: So, how did you feel when the local representative from Vimo SEWA came to meet you?Respondent: I liked it. Respondent: We asked the Vimo SEWA representative, ‘Where should we get admitted?’ So she suggested that we go to the hospital which is written on this card (the PPS card). However, even under the PPS, user fees continue to pose a financial barrier to the insured—they have to mobilize funds to cover the costs of medicines, supplies, registration fee, etc. Hospital inpatient care was limited to a provider paid on a capitation basis.18 However, Ekman’s review of 36 studies of CBHI in low-income countries found ‘weak or no evidence that schemes have an effect on the quality of care or the efficiency with which care is produced’.19 Hospital inpatient care was limited to a provider paid on a capitation basis.18 However, Ekman’s review of 36 studies of CBHI in low-income countries found ‘weak or no evidence that schemes have an effect on the quality of care or the efficiency with which care is produced’.19 Since the new system was initiated by the research unit, it took several meetings over a few months for the central Vimo SEWA administration to begin assuming responsibility for the system’s functioning. Since the new system was initiated by the research unit, it took several meetings over a few months for the central Vimo SEWA administration to begin assuming responsibility for the system’s functioning. Since the new system was initiated by the research unit, it took several meetings over a few months for the central Vimo SEWA administration to begin assuming responsibility for the system’s functioning. Since the new system was initiated by the research unit, it took several meetings over a few months for the central Vimo SEWA administration to begin assuming responsibility for the system’s functioning. For the rural PPS to be sustained in the current districts, the local representatives who make visits to the insured in hospital and provide cash reimbursement to members need to be monitored, supervised and provided with appropriate incentives (e.g. This may never be possible at public hospitals, where the bulk of the expenditure may actually be on drugs and supplies purchased from a variety of sources outside the hospital, and where there may be no infrastructure for recording costs, billing the insurer, accepting advance payments, etc. Hospitals are most likely to be willing to establish such a system if the volume of Vimo SEWA patients seen at the facility is fairly high, and if they have had some positive interaction with, or exposure to, Vimo SEWA. relaying information directly to the Vimo SEWA office), and then making payment directly to the hospital.The rural PPS can certainly be strengthened and expansion of the existing system made easier if Vimo SEWA’s membership in rural areas increases. This is due in part to the fact that each claimant is visited at home by a Vimo SEWA staff member to verify the validity of the claim. The most expensive aspect of the current PPS is the house-to-house visits required to educate members, which will not be required in future as members can be informed about the PPS at the time of their enrolment in the scheme.There remains a question as to whether Vimo SEWA should switch entirely to PPS, and no longer provide reimbursement to members who use non-preferred providers. GeneralizabilityThis pilot project provides useful lessons relating to strategic purchasing by CBHI schemes and, more broadly, managed care in India, in a context where the insurance scheme is separate from healthcare providers. Nonetheless, it is a positive finding that facilities selected on the basis of structural indicators were readily accepted by members, with a dramatic increase in utilization of the selected hospitals.The other main design features of the PPS, i.e. This is most relevant for other small CBHI schemes that have wide membership, which means that large-scale tie-ups are not possible. These ‘annual members’ remain eligible for hospitalization benefits until 70 years of age, provided that they remain insured every year after the age of 55. The PPS differs from the traditional system of Vimo SEWA in that members are provided with cash benefits before discharge from hospital and elements of managed care are employed, such as profiling and selecting PPS hospitals on the basis of quality indicators, and restricting PPS benefits to episodes of hospitalization at the selected hospitals. The quality of inpatient care accessed under the insurance scheme was also a problem. The local representative forwards claim documents to the corresponding Vimo SEWA office (Step 8, not shown).The design of the PPS system has three critical elements. On her return visit, at the time of the member’s discharge from hospital, the local representative collects documents necessary to complete the claim, including copies of the certificate of hospitalization, receipts and laboratory test results.The third critical element is that Vimo SEWA makes payment to the member prior to her (or his) discharge from hospital, thus reducing the financial barrier to seeking inpatient care. Roughly 60% of hospital inpatient cases are provided for in the private sector (both for-profit and non-profit) and 40% in the public sector, although this varies considerably by state.3 In the public sector, quality concerns include non-availability of doctors or drugs, rude behaviour, corrupt practices, long waiting periods, unclean surroundings, and lack of privacy (p. 50).2 In the private sector, quality concerns include lack of basic infrastructure and personnel; inappropriate treatment protocols (including performance of medically unnecessary procedures and prescription of excessive, expensive and risky drugs); and inadequate patient counselling/education (p. 109).2 These problems reflect the very poor record of the government and healthcare professions in establishing, monitoring and enforcing standards for the quality of healthcare services.4 Most states lack legislation for regulating private healthcare facilities, or agreed standards of medical practice such as qualifications of the staff employed, equipment, administration or treatment offered.5 Professional bodies, including the Medical Council of India, regulate neither their members nor the facilities they run.5,6 We provided hospital administrators with (i) written material about the Vimo SEWA scheme; (ii) written material about how the PPS would work; and (iii) telephone numbers for the local representative and Vimo SEWA administrative staff at the district and central level. For each of the subdistricts, it was left to the corresponding district coordinator to select a woman who was (i) mobile, as she would need to be readily available to travel to the 2 selected hospitals and the corresponding district office; (ii) trustworthy, as she would be handling cash; (iii) literate, as she would need to review documents related to each claim; (iv) confident, as she would need to collect information from doctors and hospital administrators; and (v) caring, as in addition to processing claims, she was to provide members with emotional support, and suggestions as to where they might best obtain food, medicines, supplies, etc. 