Extracts from control and test films were obtained by soaking 10 mg of the sterilized films in 10 mL DMEM medium (concentration of 1 mg/mL of medium) in an amber color vials (to prevent NO release by light stimulation) and incubated for 24 h at 37°C. After 24 h, the films were removed and the resulting extracts were kept in the refrigerator (4°C) prior to using them in the cell culture experiment.Determination of degree of cytotoxicity:The suspension of cultured cells (5000 cell/mL) was inoculated (100 μL/well) in a 96-well plate. The 96-well plate was then pre-incubated in a humidified incubator at 37°C, 5% CO2 for 24 h. After 24 h, 10 μL of the different leachates were added (n=5) and incubated for another 24 h to allow the potential toxicants to act on cells. The 96-well plate was then pre-incubated in a humidified incubator at 37°C, 5% CO2 for 24 h. After 24 h, 10 μL of the different leachates were added (n=5) and incubated for another 24 h to allow the potential toxicants to act on cells. To each of the wells, 10 μL of the CCK-8 solution was added and incubated for 3 h. To avoid the background interference, 100 μL of the DMEM medium was added in 4 of the wells. Results were reported as percentage cell viability (percentage of control) after subtracting the average absorbance of the medium (without cells) as follows.%CellViability=Absorbance of the test samples Absorbance of the control samples×1002.2.9Statistical analysisAll data is reported as a mean ± standard deviation. Once SNAP from the homogenous region is depleted and NO release is only from the crystallized regions, the catalytic ability of Cu ions to continue NO release can be limited by diffusion of Cu2+ to the crystallized regions to be reduced by the free thiols. Once SNAP from the homogenous region is depleted and NO release is only from the crystallized regions, the catalytic ability of Cu ions to continue NO release can be limited by diffusion of Cu2+ to the crystallized regions to be reduced by the free thiols. Once SNAP from the homogenous region is depleted and NO release is only from the crystallized regions, the catalytic ability of Cu ions to continue NO release can be limited by diffusion of Cu2+ to the crystallized regions to be reduced by the free thiols. Therefore, increasing the concentration of Cu-NPs will increase the available Cu2+ ions to diffusion to these crystallized regions, which is observed in the 24-hour measurements. Therefore, increasing the concentration of Cu-NPs will increase the available Cu2+ ions to diffusion to these crystallized regions, which is observed in the 24-hour measurements. No significant Cu-NPs traces were found on film’s surface with 3 wt% copper observed as illustrated by the images captured from Surface Electron Microscopy (SEM) at an accelerating voltage of 5 kV. 3.3Detection of copper leachingDetection of the amount of copper leaching from the polymeric composites is crucial for the preclinical success of biomaterial since a high diffusion of copper ions from the polymers will highly influence cell cytotoxicity and bacterial adhesion studies. The Cu-SNAP films showed a slightly higher amount of leached copper than films only containing Cu-NPs but still much below the recommended limit. The highest recorded levels (306.9 ± 99.5 ppb) from the films leachate in this study were well below cytotoxic concentrations towards mammalian cells. The highest recorded levels (306.9 ± 99.5 ppb) from the films leachate in this study were well below cytotoxic concentrations towards mammalian cells. Total platelet adhesion to each composite composition is shown in Figure 5. Total platelet adhesion to each composite composition is shown in Figure 5. Total platelet adhesion to each composite composition is shown in Figure 5. Total platelet adhesion to each composite composition is shown in Figure 5. However, the higher level of NO release provided by the 3 wt% Cu composite was observed to have slightly decreased platelet adhesion. However, the higher level of NO release provided by the 3 wt% Cu composite was observed to have slightly decreased platelet adhesion. However, the higher level of NO release provided by the 3 wt% Cu composite was observed to have slightly decreased platelet adhesion. However, this result shows that while the physical blending of NO donors into polymeric materials is limited in the lifetime of the NO release, the NO generating capability of the Cu ions within the polymer can continue to provide activity to prevent the adhesion of platelets to the material surface, providing controlled and predictable release rates from both regimes (NOrel and NOgen), making this material ideal for longer term blood contacting devices such as vascular catheters. 3.5Inhibition of gram positive and negative bacteria adhesion on polymer surfaceBiomedical device related infections (BDRIs) are one of the major cause of morbidity and the associated healthcare cost. As Cu-NPs has also been demonstrated to provide antibacterial properties, further optimization can be done to not only tune the NO release for the specific application but also provide the highest antibacterial activity between the level of Cu and NO release. Furthermore, any leaching of SNAP, or more likely NAP (N-acetyl-penicillamine) and possibly dimers of NAP, would ultimately hydrolyze to penicillamine (and acetic acid). The Cu-SNAP combination could prevent >92% of platelet adhesion upon exposure to porcine PRP for 2 h. The ICP-MS study showed that the leaching of copper from these films is below toxicity limit. These materials were then examined for NO release kinetics, platelet adhesion, bacterial inhibition, and cytotoxicity besides other physical and chemical characterizations. The antibiotic Penicillin-Streptomycin (Pen-Strep) and fetal bovine serum (FBS) were purchased from Gibco-Life Technologies (Grand Island NY 14072). The Copper nanoparticles (99%, 40–60 nm) were obtained from SkySpring Nanomaterials, Inc. (Houston, TX). The mixture was stirred in dark (to protect from NO release by light stimulation) for 40 min using a magnetic stirrer. The resulting crystals were filtered, rinsed, and dried under vacuum in the dark, and were stored at −20°C before their use in the experiment.2.2.2Fabrication of Copper-NPs doped NO generating compositesSNAP composites were prepared by initially dissolving 70 mg of Carbosil-2080A per mL of THF in an amber vial by stirring for 1h at room temperature using a magnetic stirrer. The resulting crystals were filtered, rinsed, and dried under vacuum in the dark, and were stored at −20°C before their use in the experiment.2.2.2Fabrication of Copper-NPs doped NO generating compositesSNAP composites were prepared by initially dissolving 70 mg of Carbosil-2080A per mL of THF in an amber vial by stirring for 1h at room temperature using a magnetic stirrer. To ensure that there were no traces of residual THF, the films were further vacuum dried using a desiccator at room temperature. The control Carbosil films were prepared in a similar manner but excluded the addition of SNAP. Total platelet counts in both the PRP and PPP fractions were determined using a hemocytometer (Fisher). Total platelet counts in both the PRP and PPP fractions were determined using a hemocytometer (Fisher). Total platelet counts in both the PRP and PPP fractions were determined using a hemocytometer (Fisher). The PRP and PPP were combined in a ratio to give a final platelet concentration ca. The wells were dried for 6 hours between coats, followed by 24 hours drying under vacuum to ensure all THF had been removed from the wells.Exposure to the PRP solution was done using 300 μL of the calcified PRP and incubated at 37°C for 2 hours with mild rocking (25 rpm) on a Medicus Health blood tube rocker. Briefly, 100 μL of the lysing buffer for each sample was combined with 100 μL of the detection agent and incubated for 25 min protected from light. All protocols pertaining to the use of whole blood and platelets were approved by the University of Georgia.2.2.6In vitro analysis of inhibition of bacterial adhesion on polymer surfaceIn order to evaluate the effectiveness of copper, nanoparticle assisted NO release from SNAP as a potent antibacterial strategy, a modified version of standard bacterial adhesion test was performed.52 Antibacterial activity of the Cu-SNAP composites was investigated using common causative agents of blood infections: gram-positive Staphylococcus aureus (S. aureus) and gram-negative Pseudomonas aeruginosa (P. aeruginosa). Each of the test films (SNAP, 1 wt% Cu-NPs, 3 wt% Cu-NPs, 1 wt% Cu-SNAP, 3 wt% Cu-SNAP) and the control films (Carbosil) were exposed to 2 mL of S. aureus suspension and P. aeruginosa individually in 15 mL sterile tubes (n=3). 