Further, follow-up analysis revealed major motor improvements in a subset of participants in whom CS was delivered in a manner consistent with the parameters found to be effective in the small clinical trials and animal studies (Levy et al , 2015; Plow et al , 2009). In the Phase III study, only 14% of subjects had stimulation-evoked movements in the hand, and it was this subset that had major improvements (Levy et al , 2015). Until recently, CS was thought to be potentially unsafe for TBI survivors given that TBIs often result in a lower threshold for seizures. Following an experimental stroke, animals that repeatedly practice with their impaired limb on a reach-to-grasp task, a skilled learning task, demonstrate enhanced forelimb motor recovery compared to non-trained controls (Castro-Alamancos and Borrel, 1995; Maldonado et al , 2008; Nudo et al , 1996; Tennant et al , 2014). Likely in both animal and human studies what is most effective in stroke may not be so in TBI. It may be that CS combined with rehabilitation may be more effective if separated by time, as is seen with immunotherapy treatment and reach training (Wahl et al , 2014). It may be that CS treatments need to be longer, begin earlier or later after injury or may need to include aerobic or strength training. However, we have recently reported that translation of effective treatments used in animal models of stroke may not be as effective in animal models of TBI. In the surrounding periinjury remaining motor cortex, there was also an increase in cells positive for growth inhibiting proteins and more dying neurons compared to sham controls (Jones et al , 2012). Given the possibility that CCI resulted in an environment less supportive of experience dependent plasticity, we investigated whether behavioral treatments shown to be effective in stroke models would be as effective following CCI. While the full explanation for these findings are incomplete, these data suggest that finding viable treatments for TBI recovery may require the combination of more robust treatments to drive neural remodeling and behavioral recovery. Despite these limitations, we can still learn from stroke studies as a starting point to investigate potential effective treatments in a TBI model. We will briefly describe each technique and then describe how these neurmodulatory approaches are being tested as adjuvant treatments following stroke and TBI. Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS) uses a plastic handheld paddle that is most commonly in the shape of a figure of eight, circle, or cone. The paddle is held against the head over the target brain region. The paddle is held against the head over the target brain region. A magnetic field is generated and produces a brief electrical current (electromagnetic induction) that passes through the skull and induces activity in cortical neurons below the current pulse. Depending on the frequency in which the current pulses are delivered, TMS produces either neural excitability (>5 Hz) or inhibition (~1 Hz) (Rossi et al , 2009; Wassermann et al , 1996). tDCS uses relatively weak electric currents (1–2 mA) that modulate neural activity via effects on ion channel activation (Floel, 2014; Nitsche et al , 2008). Excitatory tDCS (anodal) enhances motor learning, likely by strengthening synaptic connections through NMDA receptor-dependent long-term potentiation (LTP)-like effects and increases BDNF and TrkB activation (Fritsch et al , 2010; Monte-Silva et al , 2013; Nitsche et al , 2003a). Consistent with this, facilitatory stimulation (high-frequency TMS or anodal tDCS) over the stroke-affected motor cortex or disruptive stimulation (low-frequency TMS or cathodal tDCS) can acutely improve performance of the paretic side (Di Lazzaro et al , 2008; Fregni et al , 2005, 2006; Hummel et al , 2005; Hummel and Cohen, 2006; Khedr et al , 2005, 2013; Kim et al , 2006; Mansur et al , 2005). Reach training combined with 50 Hz cathodal stimulation also significantly increases reaching accuracy compared to 50 Hz bipolar, anodal or no stimulation; however, all stimulation polarities increased forelimb movement representations area, determined using intracortical microstimulation motor mapping, compared to no stimulation controls (Kleim et al , 2003). Cathodal 100 Hz CS increases synaptogenesis in periinfarc cortex and significantly improves reaching accuracy and a return to normalized reaching movements (Adkins et al , 2008). CS was also most beneficial when paired concurrently with task-specific practice on reaching taks, i.e., its effects did not generalize to other motor behaviors that were not practiced during CS delivery (Adkins et al , 2006, 2008; Adkins-Muir and Jones, 2003). It is likely, but not fully studied, that CS is more efficacious early after infarct because the brain is more plastic after injury within the first month (Biernaskie et al , 2004; Carmichael et al , 2005; Carmichael, 2006). Cathodal 100 Hz CS also was not effective in severely impaired motor cortical stroke animals (Adkins et al , 2008) or following white matter ischemic lesion (Boychuk et al , 2015). 