We tested whether the differences in correlation coefficients were statistically significant between the groups. We tested whether the differences in correlation coefficients were statistically significant between the groups. (ii) Activation and duration of opiate abuse (drug groups only)As shown in Fig. However, individuals on a higher dose of methadone showed greater OFC activation (r=0.71, p<0.05; see Fig. Although this was a post hoc analysis, it was hypothesis-led, and therefore restricted to four key regions of interest: orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), amygdala and insula. At present, it is still unclear whether there is a hemispheric specialisation in the processing of reward and punishment. In particular, the dose-dependent activation of the left OFC in methadone users, as shown in Fig. Dose-dependent effects of methadone on cognitive function suggest that methadone should be administered twice a day instead of a single daily dose in order to avoid episodic memory impairments (Curran et al  2001). A better understanding of the effects of methadone on prefrontal networks and their implication for cognition, may also provide useful information for the ongoing debate concerning the ‘optimal’ dose for MMT (e.g., Blaney and Craig 1999; Brady et al  2005; Gerra et al  2003; Strain et al  1999). The OFC has been widely regarded as a key brain region for the detection of changing reinforcement contingencies that signal the need for changes in behavioural responding (Kringelbach 2005; Rolls 2000). Wilson et al  (2004) found that only drug users not enrolled in treatment showed activation in OFC when exposed to their drug of choice, which was interpreted as a greater willingness to give in to cravings and drug taking. Wilson et al  (2004) found that only drug users not enrolled in treatment showed activation in OFC when exposed to their drug of choice, which was interpreted as a greater willingness to give in to cravings and drug taking. Lack of response regulation following negative feedback in opiate usersIn controls, we found a significant correlation between deactivation of the pregenual ACC and ‘playing safe’ following a loss of points, as displayed in Fig. Taken together, our findings are consistent with the notion that opiate users, regardless of the opioid used, are failing to utilize feedback information to adjust ongoing behaviour. Our findings have also shown that different types of opioids affect orbitofrontal function differentially during decision-making, although decision-making behaviour itself was not measurably impaired. We acknowledge that the present study constituted a post hoc analysis and that the block design and small group size limit our interpretations. The association of the affective value and the stimulus is encoded in the amygdala (Schoenbaum et al  1998), a critical brain area in the detection of motivationally salient events and in learning to anticipate future punishments based on predictive cues (Blair et al  2005; Davis and Whalen 2001). Four controls had tried cannabis in the past but never developed regular use.Prior to scanning, urine samples were analysed for the following substances: methadone, morphine, amphetamine, cocaine and benzodiazepines. In the methadone group, one sample was additionally positive for amphetamine, four were positive for cocaine and two were positive for benzodiazepines. Urine analyses of controls were negative for all substances. All participants gave written informed consent prior to participation and received monetary compensation for taking part in the study. Scanning procedure and materialsPrior to the positron emission tomography (PET) scans, a T1-weighted MRI scan was acquired from each participant. Each scan provided an image of regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) integrated for 90 s from the time when the tracer first enters the cerebral circulation. Each decision risked a certain number of points associated with the colours red and blue on that particular trial. Reward values (90:10, 80:20, 70:30, 60:40 and 50:50 points) and colour ratios of the boxes (5:1, 4:2 and 3:3 boxes) changed from one trial to another. On trials with uneven probabilities and outcome values, the least likely option was always associated with the higher reward value. Since the likely small reward options and risky large reward options were mutually exclusive, we only included the choices of the likely option in our analysis. Neuroimaging data analysisThe images were analysed using the Statistical Parametric Mapping software (SPM2; Wellcome Department of Cognitive Neurology, London, UK). These regions were then subject to post hoc t tests implemented in SPSS (see Table 2). Demographic and behavioural data analysisProportion data were arcsine transformed to reduce skew as described by Howell (1997). Demographic and drug-use dataDescriptive group characteristics are shown in Table 1. Therefore, the following analyses are based on data from 29 participants. Therefore, the following analyses are based on data from 29 participants. Overall, participants preferred the likely option to the risky one. The groups did not differ significantly in terms of response latency (F2,26=.97, p=0.392). Heroin users were intermediate between the three groups (left OFC: M​>​H=C; see also Fig. 