Overexpression of peroxiredoxin II significantly attenuated this increase, while downregulation of peroxiredoxin II resulted in further increases of TBARS (Fig. Moreover, the well-known pro-apoptotic proteins Bax, active caspases 3, 9 and 12 were significantly increased upon H2O2 treatment (Fig. Expression of the other peroxiredoxin family members, catalase and glutathione peroxidase (GHPx-1)To further determine the specificity of decreased expression of peroxiredoxin II in the heart upon ischemia-reperfusion injury or in the cardiomyocytes with H2O2 treatment, protein levels of the other five peroxiredoxin isoforms, including: peroxiredoxin I, III, IV, V and VI were examined. In addition, the decreased expression levels of peroxiredoxin I and GHPx-1 remained the same among the cells infected with Ad.-prxII or Ad.prxII-AS, compared to controls (Fig. Furthermore, overexpression of human peroxiredoxin II in Molt-4 leukemia cells inhibited release of cytochrome c from mitochondria to cytosol and lipid peroxidation, therefore protecting the cells from apoptosis in a similar manner as Bcl-2 [54]. Interestingly, peroxiredoxin II could also prevent H2O2 accumulation in these leukemic cells, suggesting that it may function upstream of Bcl-2 [54]. Conversely, it was reported that preischemic treatment of isolated rat hearts with MG132 results in a dose-dependent decrease in postischemic function, but increased levels of ubiquitinated proteins [38]. However, the subsequent removal of stressors induces the dissociation of this protein structure into low MW proteins and triggers a chaperone-to-peroxidase functional switch. Hydroxyl radicals generated from the decomposition of H2O2 through the iron dependent Fenton reaction initiate lipid peroxidation by reacting with methylene groups of polyunsaturated fatty acids [3]. The anti-apoptotic effects of peroxiredoxin II overexpression were associated with increases in Bcl-2 and preserved Bax levels after H2O2 treatment, leading to inhibition of caspases 3 and 9 activation (Fig. The in vivo role of peroxiredoxin II in oxidative stress-induced cardiomyocyte death and apoptosis is currently unclear. It has been shown that various antioxidant approaches (vitamin C, vitamin E, probucol, dimethylthiourea or genetic manipulation) can ameliorate this adverse remodeling. All experimental procedures and protocols used in this study were reviewed and approved by the University of Cincinnati Institutional animal care and use committee and are in accordance with the National Institutes of Health “Guide for the care and use of laboratory animals” (NIH publication No. Hearts were then snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and homogenized in 1× Cell Lysis Buffer (Cell Signaling Technology, Danvers, MA) supplemented with 1 mM PMSF and complete protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN) for quantitative immunoblotting. Hearts were quickly removed and the aorta was cannulated by Langendorff mode and perfused with modified Krebs-Henseleit buffer (KHB: 118 mM NaCl, 4.8 mM KCl, 25 mM HEPES, 1.25 mM K2HPO4, 1.25 mM MgSO4, 11 mM Glucose, 5 mM Taurine and 10 mM Butane-dione Monoxime; pH 7.4) for 5–10 min [13]. Then, 25 μM Ca was added to the perfusion buffer, and hearts were perfused for another 5 min. The cells were allowed to settle down automatically and Ca concentration was gradually raised to 1.0 mM. Recombinant adenoviruses with sense or antisense of the peroxiredoxin II cDNA were generated, using the pAd.Track-CMV/pAdEasy-1 system [12]. After 2 h of plating, cardiomyocytes were infected with sense or antisense peroxiredoxin II adenoviruses (Ad.prxII or Ad.prxIIAS) or control Ad.GFP at a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of 200 for 2 h before the addition of a suitable volume of complete DMEM medium (DMEM containing 2 mg/ml BSA, 2 mM l-carnitine, 5 mM creatine, 5 mM taurine, 100 IU/ml penicillin and 100 μg/ml streptomycin) [22]. Nearly 100% of myocytes appeared infected at 200 MOI by 24 h. The cell phenotype and morphology remained similar among non-infected and adenoviral-infected groups after 24 h of infection. Cardiomyocyte plasma membrane integrity was assessed by measuring lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) release into the culture medium with an in vitro LDH assay kit (Sigma–Aldrich). Quantitative immunoblottingCultured myocytes were harvested and lysed for 20 min at 4°C in lysis buffer (20 mM Tris–HCl, pH 7.5, 150 mM NaCl, 1% NP-40, 10% glycerol, 0.4 mM sodium orthovanadate, 10 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 10 mM sodium fluoride, 0.5 mM DTT, and 2 μl/ml protease inhibitor cocktail). After transfer to membranes, quantitative immunoblotting analysis was performed with the corresponding primary antibodies [peroxiredoxins I to IV from Alexis Biochemicals (Lausen, Switzerland), peroxiredoxins V and VI from Abcam (Cambridge, MA), catalase and GHPx-1 from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Santa Cruz, CA), Bcl-2 and Bax from Invitrogen (South San Francisco, CA); cleaved caspase 3 (Asp175), caspase 9, and caspase 12 from Cell Signaling (Danvers, MA); and calsequestrin (CSQ) from Affinity Bioreagents (Golden, CO)] at a 1:500 to 1:5,000 dilution. Under physiological conditions, the toxic effects of ROS can be prevented by such scavenging enzymes as superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione peroxidase (GHPx) and catalase, as well as other non-enzymatic antioxidants. To investigate whether peroxiredoxin II expression is also altered, mouse hearts were perfused ex vivo in a Langendorff mode and subjected to 40 min of ischemia followed by 60 min of reperfusion. Briefly, cardiomyocytes were treated with different doses of H2O2 (0–200 μM) for 2 h and the levels of peroxiredoxin II were determined by quantitative immunoblotting. In the cells infected with Ad.prxII, the level of peroxiredoxin II was increased by 1.5-fold, while this protein was decreased by 70% in the Ad.prxII-AS cells, compared to the Ad.GFP group (Fig. Accordingly, cell nuclear fragmentation was significantly increased by ∼2.8-fold in both control and Ad.GFP infected cells. 