The relative increase in firing for the steady-state period was always larger than for the peak rate. Furthermore, the overlap between the responses before and after BAPTA increased with faster approaches, a result consistent with the greater effectiveness of adaptation on slower and weaker stimuli.The LGMD’s firing rate in response to looming stimuli peaks at a fixed delay, δ, after the stimulus exceeds a threshold angle, θthresh (ref. Two known processes that contribute to declining firing rates in the LGMD during sustained stimulation are feed-forward inhibition14,15 and spike-frequency adaptation16. Moreover, θthresh and δ showed no significant change after BAPTA iontophoresis (Fig. A large influx of calcium was observed along the main process between the SIZ and the excitatory dendritic field (Fig. We modified it to take into account the morphology of the LGMD and the Ca2+ imaging data in Figure 5. ; N = 7 current levels, P = 0.002; Wilcoxon rank-sum test). We found that decreasing τCa—albeit by a larger value than observed experimentally, from 132 to 20 ms—reproduced qualitatively the responses to current injection after BAPTA iontophoresis in vivo (Fig. 6a–e).After confirming our ability to approximate the current injection results, we turned our attention to the contribution the simulated KCa conductance could make to visual processing. As it takes about a hundred milliseconds to activate fully, the observed adaptation could potentially satisfy the aforementioned timescale constraints. Our results suggest that spike-frequency adaptation (SFA) in the LGMD is mostly mediated by an SK-like calcium dependent potassium (KCa) conductance. The lack of an effect of apamin and other drugs targeting SK channels (Fig. However, the ineffectiveness of apamin in insects is well documented27, and the lack of effect of other SK drugs occurs under some circumstances in vertebrates as well37. Imaging revealed calcium influx to occur between the excitatory dendritic field and the spike initiation zone (Fig. Imaging revealed calcium influx to occur between the excitatory dendritic field and the spike initiation zone (Fig. 5), suggesting that the localization of the KCa conductance is optimized for maximal impact of its inhibitory effect35. Indeed, the onset transients were largely abolished in our model without feed-forward inhibition (Supplementary Fig. Indeed, the onset transients were largely abolished in our model without feed-forward inhibition (Supplementary Fig. Indeed, the onset transients were largely abolished in our model without feed-forward inhibition (Supplementary Fig. This, combined with the fact that smaller stimuli elicit little feed-forward inhibition15, suggests that the SK-like KCa conductance is the main driver of selectivity against translating stimuli. In weakly electric fish, SK channels contribute to the frequency tuning of pyramidal neurons in the electrosensory lateral line lobe45. In the LGMD, such stimuli are able to overwhelm SFA, leading to minimal changes in response whether SFA is present or not. Studies in model systems such as the LGMD, for which relatively detailed knowledge of a behavioral role exists, reveal that the functions of individual conductances are often highly specific in their contribution to the overall neural computations carried out by their respective neurons. In BAPTA experiments, electrodes were filled with 2 M potassium acetate, 200 mM BAPTA. Instantaneous firing frequency curves were calculated as described previously16. The AHP time constant was fitted as described previously16. Cadmium saline (as before, but with 1 mM Cd2+, 0 mM Ca2+, 10 mM Mg2+) was added using a gravity perfusion system, as was high-K+ saline (95 mM, versus 5 mM in control). To increase [K+] without changing [Cl−], [Na+] was reduced to 54 mM, which did not abolish spiking. To increase [K+] without changing [Cl−], [Na+] was reduced to 54 mM, which did not abolish spiking. Cells were filled following the same iontophoresis protocol as was used for BAPTA filling in electrophysiology experiments, using electrodes containing 10 μl of a 5 mM aqueous solution of Oregon green BAPTA-I (Molecular Probes) at their tip. Each pixel’s ΔF/F time series was obtained by first carrying out background subtraction and then averaging over a 5 × 5 pixel area centered at the given pixel. Each pixel’s ΔF/F time series was obtained by first carrying out background subtraction and then averaging over a 5 × 5 pixel area centered at the given pixel. Spontaneous excitatory and inhibitory input was added, as was a visual-input timing jitter. Model output was analyzed like experimental data, with N = 25 runs for all visual simulations. 1c), independent of velocity, size, aspect ratio and direction of motion (Fig. Furthermore, looming stimuli elicit vigorous motor responses, well correlated with LGMD and DCMD activity10,18, whereas translating stimuli do not19. 2f), but produced an increase in fss (Fig. 1 online shows data for individual locusts). 1 online shows data for individual locusts). 1 online shows data for individual locusts). In contrast to BAPTA, Cd2+ produced a decrease in f0 and broadened the action potentials (compare insets in Fig. First, the relative level of adaptation, Fadapt, after intracellular current injection in the LGMD16 was well correlated with AHP magnitude (ρ = −0.60, N = 23 locusts). First, the relative level of adaptation, Fadapt, after intracellular current injection in the LGMD16 was well correlated with AHP magnitude (ρ = −0.60, N = 23 locusts). Finally, if the AHP is governed by the same mechanism as adaptation, the time constant of AHP recovery, τAHP, will be determined by the time constant governing the decline in free calcium, τCa (ref. Finally, if the AHP is governed by the same mechanism as adaptation, the time constant of AHP recovery, τAHP, will be determined by the time constant governing the decline in free calcium, τCa (ref. We depolarized the neuron from a slightly hyperpolarized holding potential before and after perfusion with high-potassium saline. The kinetics of adaptation and AHP recovery were consistent with those of systems wherein intracellular calcium interacting with KCa channels of small conductance (SK) drives adaptation and AHP recovery (refs. Behaviorally, it has been demonstrated that the timing of the phases of the locust jump also occur after the crossing of fixed angular threshold sizes10. Additionally, several SK antagonists and agonists failed to produce an effect (Supplementary Pharmacology and Supplementary Fig. Like Cd2+, ChTX reduced f0 (Fig. 2), suggesting the presence of a BK conductance, which is known to act on the submillisecond timescale and shape the action potential and f0 (ref. 