The only substrate for which CPG demonstrates little saturation, with an increase in activity between 10 and 100 µM substrate and therefore a high Km value, is PABA-GLU. Cleavage of Reduced Folate by PGH and CPGNext we measured the ability of PGH to cleave several physiologically relevant reduced folates, in comparison with CPG. It is also used clinically as a treatment for elevated levels of methotrexate in the blood [21]. The negative results with PGH were confirmed with HPLC analysis of reaction mixtures analyzed by HPLC as described in the methods (data not shown). Wood and Hitchings studied the transport and breakdown of folates and anti-folates by several bacteria, and found that uptake of folate required glucose, implying that it was an active process [24]; several bacterial strains degraded folate, producing concomitant amounts of PABA-GLU. Efforts to purify a mammalian enzyme that cleaved the N9-N10 bond of 5-formyltetrahydrofolate surprisingly led to the purification of rat ferritin [25]. PABA-GLU, as well as its metabolite acetamido-PABA-GLU (a product of hepatic metabolism of PABA-GLU), are in urine and in the gastrointestinal tract where endogenous bacteria, include E. coli, reside. Under cellular conditions of nutrient deprivation, the salvage of PABA from partially degraded folates may relieve folate deficiency. The crystal structure of Ps-CPG2 was determined in the presence of metal ion but in the absence of folate substrates, however, so specific predictions regarding folate substrate binding motifs remain difficult. The difference in metal requirement for each enzyme may contribute to the differences in substrate specificity as well. In Ps-CPG2 a single aspartate (D141) coordinates both zinc ions in the active site, and this amino acid is not conserved in either AbgA or AbgB, suggesting that there are differences in the metal binding sites of these subunits. Specificities for various folyl and anti-folyl substrates among these enzymes varied, however, as did their metal dependence. We are continuing our studies of the abg region to better understand the role of these genes and proteins in Escherichia coli physiology. MaterialsFolic acid, p-aminobenzoyl-glutamic acid, and purified Pseudomonas Carboxypeptidase G (CPG) were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Protein Sequence AlignmentsSequence alignments were performed using the free online software created and supported by the UniProt Consortium [16]. RS-16 carboxypeptidase G2 (P06621) were obtained from the UniProt website. Assays for cleavage of PABA-GLU by CPG were performed similarly, except that ZnCl2 (2 mM) was substituted for the MnCl2. Assays for cleavage of PABA-GLU by CPG were performed similarly, except that ZnCl2 (2 mM) was substituted for the MnCl2. The velocity was calculated as the slope of the line (nmoles of product versus time in minutes). Determination of the Glutamate Yield from Cleavage of Various Substrates by HPLCEnzyme reaction mixtures were analyzed for glutamate content using an HPLC-based method, as described previously [15]. The larger, catalytic domain possesses two zinc cations in close proximity at the active site while the smaller domain is involved in subunit interactions. While we theorized that each PGH subunit might perform one of the functions of Ps-CPG2, i.e., subunit interaction or catalytic function, the homology among AbgB, AbgA and Ps-CPG2 spans the entire length of the proteins.Both Ps-CPG2 and PGH are metalloproteins. At the homologous position of Ps-CPG2 Asp141, both AbgA and AbgB have a histidine, while at the position of the zinc2-coordinated histidine in Ps-CPG2, AbgA and AbgB possess an aspartate and a glutamate, respectively. The prior experiment involved a time consuming system in which samples of reaction mixtures were filtered to remove enzyme, then subjected to chemical modification (dabsylation) of the product glutamate which was then analyzed by HPLC. The molar absorptivity coefficients for the parent compounds, however, range from ~22,000 to 27,000 M−1∙cm−1; thus, solutions of these compounds greater than ~100 µM possess a peak absorbance beyond the limit of most spectrophotometers. 