However, caregivers almost unanimously reported wanting to receive such services, whereas only half of the patients reported that their caregiver would be interested in receiving services, and many patients felt that it would be difficult for their caregiver to find time to do so.These results add to the growing body of literature that documents the underutilization of mental health services by ICs (Vanderwerker et al , 2005), which often continues into bereavement (Cherlin et al , 2007; Lichtenthal et al , 2011). These include: (1) ICs’ lack of knowledge about the services available to them (Aoun et al , 2005); (2) the stigma associated with mental health service use (Levy & Derby, 1992; Vanderwerker et al , 2005; Cherlin et al , 2007; Lichtenthal et al , 2011); (3) caregivers’ guilt and belief that utilization of mental health services would have harmful effects on the patients for whom they care (Hudson et al , 2004; Aoun et al , 2005; Janda et al , 2006); (4) practical issues of time (e.g., Vanderwerker et al , 2005; Keir, 2007; Lichtenthal et al , 2011); and (5) limited financial resources (Hayman et al , 2001). Additional information regarding patients’ concurrent appointments (i.e., Did they travel to MSKCC just for psychotherapy? ICs face unique challenges in making meaning, and palliative care researchers have acknowledged that finding meaning in the caregiving experience leads to better mental health among caregivers and, in turn, the provision of better care for the patient (Park et al , 2010). Meaning-Centered Psychotherapy (MCP), an existential therapeutic model developed by our group (Breitbart et al , 2010; 2012), addresses the existential issues of suffering, guilt, and death. ICs are at risk for a range of psychological (e.g., anxiety, depression, hopelessness) (Kissane et al , 1994; Dumont et al , 2006) and physical (e.g., increased mortality, cardiovascular disease, poor immune functioning, sleep difficulties) (Christakis & Allison, 2006; Rohleder et al , 2009) complications. Participants and ProceduresParticipants were recruited from the outpatient counseling center in the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center (MSKCC) between July 6 and August 2, 2011. MeasuresThe questionnaires used for the study from which these data were drawn were developed by the Psychotherapy Laboratory in the Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences and included both open- and closed-ended questions. Data presented here pertain to participants’ responses to three domains assessed:Caregiver RoleCaregivers were asked, “Do you consider yourself a caregiver to a cancer patient?” (yes/no); “If YES, what do you feel makes you a caregiver?” “If YES, what is your relationship to the patient (i.e., spouse, parent, child, friend)? These symptoms are common elements of caregiver burden, which has been described as “a multidimensional biopsychosocial reaction resulting from an imbalance of care demands relative to caregivers’ personal time, social roles, physical and emotional states, financial resources, and formal care resources given the other multiple roles they fulfill” (Given et al , 2001, p. 5). Caregivers’ responses also revealed their preference for interventions that could be delivered over the phone or the internet (which would allow them to remain at home with the patient and avoid the time and financial costs of traveling to and from the treatment center), and individual sessions that could be flexibly scheduled at convenient times for the caregiver.Sixty-eight percent (n = 22) of patients reported that their caregiver was not receiving any type of therapy or counseling, and 50% (n = 16) believe that their caregiver would be interested in receiving services. Caregiver RoleThe majority of caregivers self-identified or were identified by the patient as a spouse/partner, which is in line with previous studies which have identified cancer caregivers as primarily female spouse/partners (Garlo et al , 2010; Tamayo et al , 2010; Van Houtven et al , 2010; Mezue et al , 2011; Parvataneni et al , 2011). The most common responsibility identified was the importance of having the caregiver physically take the patient (many of whom may not have been ambulatory) to physicians’ appointments, and be present at these appointments to help the patient process information discussed and make medical decisions. Additionally, the time caregivers devote to providing care often prevents them from working full-time paid jobs; caregiving activities (i.e., transportation, medical supplies) are often costly, and, therefore, it is not surprising that caregivers and patients both reported that financial concerns were the third most common correlate of burden among caregivers.One fifth of caregivers reported concerns with guilt, issues with their role/sense of identity, and self-care, but very few reported concerns with their sense of purpose or meaning in life. The responses of patients (outlined in Table 3) highlight this belief among patients of the connectedness between meaning and burden; three patients directly referenced the potential benefit of meaning on symptoms of anxiety and depression, and one patient reported that increased meaning would facilitate the caregiver’s sense of the importance of this role which, in turn, would allow him to develop a greater appreciation for himself. 