It has been shown in experimental settings that tracking faster and faster periodic inputs leads to a regime where subjects skip cycles because they are unable to keep up. We can then determine whether the spike period is more than the period of the driving oscillation for some initial conditions of the system.Briefly, let the positive and negative spike times be defined as {tip}i∈Z and {tin}i∈Z, respectively. If the condition maxk(θkp+θkn)>1ω is not met, we have skipped cycles at the output z. Here, we consider the neural underpinnings of the phenomenon of skipped cycles. Our modeling framework provides us with an explicit dependence of the emergence of undesirable phenomena (skipped cycles) as a function of q, the parameter that directly dictates the density of spikes (neural computing), the musculoskeletal system M, and cerebrocerebellar dynamics K. Specifically, we show that for a fixed musculoskeletal system M, cerebrocerebellar dynamics K, and a pair of motor neurons with thresholds q (for activation of agonist/antagonist pair of muscles), the oscillation input (periodic back-and-forth movement) with frequency ω may generate undesired skipped cycles if ω is too large and/or the density of spikes (related to q) is too small. This suggests that in theory, one can compensate for damage to the neural system using reinforcements—for example, via neuroprosthetics at the musculoskeletal end. A critical component in our SCS model that captures undesirable tracking phenomena in the fast regime is the pulsatile control implemented by alpha motor neurons. Our SCS model can reproduce experimentally known properties of motor neurons and responses to step, pulse, and sinusoidal signals. To test our hypothesis, we set out to (1) construct a mathematical model of the SCS consisting of a feedback interconnection between the cerebrocerebellar system, alpha motor neurons, and the musculoskeletal system and then (2) develop formal methods to prove the existence of and compute ωc as a function of our model parameters. For example, if you insert a high-frequency periodic input into a linear model, the same frequency appears at the output but is likely attenuated. Discontinuities appearing in slow movements are a well-known feature that have been studied to elucidate the junction between neuronal activity and the musculoskeletal system (Plamondon & Alimi, 1997). These discontinuities are not captured with linear models of the SCS (Hanneton et al , 1997), also discussed in section 3.2. Due to this limitation of linear models, nonlinear threshold-based pulsatile control of movements was first suggested in 1947 (Craik, 1947) and since then has been in active exploration in the feedback setting (Fishbach, Roy, Bastianen, Miller, & Houk, 2007; Loram, Gollee, Lakie, & Gawthrop, 2011; Loram, Van De Kamp, Lakie, Gollee, & Gawthrop, 2014; Miall et al , 1993; Novak, Miller, & Houk, 2002; Wolpert, Miall, Winter, & Stein, 1992; Hanneton et al , 1997; Farmer, 1999). Here, we construct a biophysically based, analytically tractable nonlinear model of the SCS that reproduces several characteristics of neuronal and motor outputs in response to periodic inputs in the slow and fast regimes observed in humans and primates in both health and disease. Specifically, we show that for a fixed musculoskeletal system M, cerebrocerebellar dynamics K, and a group of motor neurons with spiking thresholds q (for activation of agonist/antagonist pair of muscles), the oscillatory input (periodic back-and-forth movement) with frequency ω may generate undesired skipped cycles if ω > ωc(M, K, q). Consequently, we maintain the spiking or pulsatile nature of alpha motor neuron control of muscles by modeling them with IAF models, which have been used to model motor neurons in both experimental and computational studies (Goroso, Cisi, & Kohn, 2000; Cofer et al , 2010).For each joint in our muscle model described in section 2.2, we characterize an effective agonist group of motor units and an effective antagonist group of motor units. when v (t) > q, a weighted positive spike, qδ (t), is produced. In this section, we first demonstrate how our closed-loop SCS model qualitatively reproduces fundamental properties of alpha motor neuron activity and musculoskeletal responses during movement generation. We then show that a linear SCS model would not suffice to reproduce the phenomenon of skipped cycles for higher frequencies. The model reproduces spiking patterns during slow periodic movements, as shown in Figure 4c, in fact also capturing the discontinuities during slow movements.The SCS model also reproduces movement responses to some elemental reference inputs in both health and cerebellar disease. Cerebellar patients are known to display dysmetria, specifically hypermetria (or significant overshoot), as well as oscillatory activity past the end of the movement. 3.2Linear Time-Invariant SCS Model Does Not Display Skipped Cycles.The presence of skipped cycles is perhaps the most important feature observed while tracking fast sinusoidal inputs, and this phenomenon cannot be modeled using linear time-invariant (LTI) systems or remedied in open loop using a linear system at the output of the movement. 3.3Spiking SCS Model Enables Analytical Derivation of ωc.In the SCS model as in Figure 3, we see in Figure 7 that our SCS model is able to maintain good tracking performance to a sinusoidal input until the input frequency is larger than the fundamental frequency ωc. 