Radiotherapy, used after failed transsphenoidal surgery and or medical therapy, is associated with relatively high complication rates (2–6). EGF modestly attenuated GH mRNA expression (Fig. 1C), and the growth factor did not induce S phase entry (supplemental Fig. In contrast to the observed effects in GH3 cells, EGF treatment for up to 48 hrs did not alter AtT20 cell POMC gene expression (not shown). 3Aa) or serum (not shown) rapidly (within 5 min) induced tyrosine phosphorylation of several proteins sized > 160, ~95, ~70 and ~ 40 kd. EGF but not serum also induced tyrosine phosphorylation of ~55 kd-sized proteins, while phosphorylation by serum was more sustained (> 2 hrs, not shown), as compared to the transient EGF effects (5 – 15 min). B104-1-1 murine fibroblasts transformed by constitutively active oncogenic rat neu variant p185neu were used as a positive control for immunoprecipitation with the monoclonal antibody 7.16.4 (Fig. B104-1-1 murine fibroblasts transformed by constitutively active oncogenic rat neu variant p185neu were used as a positive control for immunoprecipitation with the monoclonal antibody 7.16.4 (Fig. B104-1-1 murine fibroblasts transformed by constitutively active oncogenic rat neu variant p185neu were used as a positive control for immunoprecipitation with the monoclonal antibody 7.16.4 (Fig. B104-1-1 murine fibroblasts transformed by constitutively active oncogenic rat neu variant p185neu were used as a positive control for immunoprecipitation with the monoclonal antibody 7.16.4 (Fig. Results of combined EGFR and ERK or PI3K inhibition were within the expected additive range of single agent treatments, whereas greater-than-additive effects were observed for combined EGFR and PKC signaling blockade. EGF did not induce ERK phosphorylation in AtT20 cells (not shown), consistent with no detectable EGFR expression (Fig. Gefitinib treatment reduced absolute tumor volume from 865 ± 94 mm3 to 580 ± 110 mm3 vs. control by day 18 (Fig. Although anorexic effects of gefitinib cannot be excluded, at MTD (150 mg/kg) in NCR-NU mice, weight loss does not exceed 10% (22, 23) and weight loss was not observed compared to vehicle-treated animals not harboring tumors. EGF induces lactotroph differentiation (27, 28) and targeted expression of a dominant negative EGFR in transgenic mice blocks both somatotroph and lactotroph development (29). EGFR inhibition with gefitinib also reversed serum-induced lactotroph differentiation and cell proliferation, indicating a role for EGFR signaling in the mitogenic response. In addition to activation of ErbB3, induction with the ErbB3 ligand heregulin also activated p185c-neu, indicating p185c-neu as the preferred dimerization partner in GH3 cells. EGFR signaling involves diverse cell-specific intracellular pathways and patterns of dimer formation (9), and we show that EGFR-related pathways activated by serum-induced GH3 cell proliferation include ERK, PI3K and PKC. Thus, the results shown here suggest that the blockade of EGFR / ERK, and not PI3K signaling mediate gefitinib inhibition of GH3 cell proliferation. Similar to the in vitro results, ex vivo analysis showed down-regulation of PRL but not GH mRNA expression. Inhibition of EGFR homo- and / or heterodimerization may block direct mitogenic signals by ErbB ligands or inhibit ErbB receptor trans-activation by other stimuli (46, 47) required for induction of cell proliferation. These infrequent neoplasms usually exhibit a slowly progressive malignant phenotype with metastasis, while resisting most forms of conventional therapy including dopamine agonists, surgery and radiation (7, 8). Templates for probes and Northern Blot AnalysisProbes for murine POMC, Pttg1, rat GH and PRL were generated as described (16–18). RNA extraction was performed using TRIZOL® reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Membrane pre-hybridization and hybridization were performed using QuickHyb Solution® (Stratagene) and then exposed to HyperfilmTM MP (Amersham) for 1 to 4 days at −70°C. Quantitative PCRTotal RNA was extracted with Trizol Reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to manufacturer instructions. Quantitative PCRTotal RNA was extracted with Trizol Reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) according to manufacturer instructions. Before processing, RNA samples were treated with DNase I (Deoxyribonuclease I, Amplification Grade, Invitrogen) to eliminate genomic DNA contamination. Before processing, RNA samples were treated with DNase I (Deoxyribonuclease I, Amplification Grade, Invitrogen) to eliminate genomic DNA contamination. Cells cultured in 100 mm dishes were lysed in 1 ml Lysis buffer 1 containing protease and phosphatase inhibitor cocktail tablets (Roche Molecular Biochemicals). IP with appropriate antibody titers was performed for 1 hr prior to addition of agarose G beads (50 μl) overnight at 4ºC. Membranes were blocked for 1 hr in 2% nonfat dry milk (or 5% BSA) in TBS-T buffer, and incubated overnight with primary antibody. After washing with TBS-T, membranes were incubated with peroxidase conjugated secondary antibody for 1.5 hrs (2% nonfat dry milk or 5% BSA in TBS-T buffer). In vivo experimentsFemale athymic NCR-NU mice (8–10 weeks of age) were purchased from Taconic Farms, Inc. (Hudson, NY, USA) and maintained in a laminar air-flow unit under aseptic conditions. Maximum tolerated dose (MTD; 150 mg/kg) of gefitinib in NCR-NU mice has been determined previously (with similar administration schedules) (22, 23). ImmunofluorecenceSlides containing tissue sections were baked for 20 min at 60°C, washed in xylene, ethanol gradient (100%, 95%, 85%, 75%) and then ddH2O. For ACTH-secreting and clinically nonfunctioning pituitary adenomas (NFPA), no effective drug therapies currently exist (4, 5). For ACTH-secreting and clinically nonfunctioning pituitary adenomas (NFPA), no effective drug therapies currently exist (4, 5). A second channel detecting autofluorescence with wavelength from 560 to 600 nm was used. Both channels were color coded and merged. lens was used for overview images and a PlanApo 40x 1.2 N.A. Hormone assaysRIA for rat GH and PRL were performed in duplicate, using reagents provided by the National Hormone and Peptide Program, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, California, USA). Iodination of GH and PRL (5 μg) with iodine-125 (500 μCi) (PerkinElmer Life & Analytical Sciences, Boston, MA, USA) mixed with 0.1 mg Iodo-Gen (Pierce, Rockford, IL) was performed using 10-ml columns prepared by G-75 Sephadex (Sigma Chemical Co.). 