Furthermore, there was no difference in the number of AB action potentials nor its firing frequency during the retractor and protractor phases of the VCN-gastric mill rhythm (AB Spike Number: Protraction, 6.0 ± 0.2; Retraction, 5.8 ± 0.1, p>0.05, n=4; Firing Frequency: Pro., 28.0 ± 1.8 Hz; Ret., 29.6 ± 1.1, p>0.05, n=4). In the absence of hyperpolarizing current injection, the AB action potentials always initiated near the STG and occurred later in the stn and son (n=10/10) (Fig. In contrast, when ABSTG was hyperpolarized, the AB action potentials occurred first in the son and propagated towards the STG (n=4/4) (Fig. These antidromic AB action potentials occurred in rhythmic bursts with a longer cycle period than the orthodromic AB bursts (Fig. Although consistently longer than the control pyloric cycle periods, the AB antidromic burst cycle periods were similar to typical pyloric cycle periods (0.5–2 sec), and distinct from gastric mill cycle periods (5–20 sec) (Marder and Bucher, 2007) (Beenhakker et al , 2004).At the STG, the antidromic bursts of AB action potentials propagated into the region where the AB membrane potential was held hyperpolarized by current injection, which prevented transmitter release from ABSTG. 8C).We used these CoG-initiated AB action potential bursts, recorded intra-axonally in AB near the STG, to assess the possibility that AB was presynaptically inhibited during VCN-protraction. The distinct activity patterns in MCN1 and CPN2 during these two gastric mill rhythms contributed to their ability to drive different versions of the gastric mill rhythm (Beenhakker and Nusbaum, 2004; Blitz et al , 2008) (Fig. In the isolated STNS, one documented function for CPG feedback to projection neurons is to enable the pyloric circuit to regulate the gastric mill rhythm (Wood et al , 2004). Previous work established that co-activation of MCN1 and CPN2 is necessary and sufficient for driving the VCN-gastric mill rhythm as well as the distinct gastric mill rhythm triggered by the gastropyloric receptor (GPR) neuron (Beenhakker and Nusbaum, 2004; Blitz et al , 2004). In several other motor systems, population coding is proposed to be the mechanism underlying the ability of single networks to generate multiple motor patterns (Georgopoulos, 1995; Kristan and Shaw, 1997; Lewis and Kristan, 1998; Liu and Fetcho, 1999). The ability of different extrinsic inputs to trigger distinct gastric mill rhythms despite their convergent co-activation of MCN1 and CPN2 supports the hypothesis that motor pattern selection can be mediated either by recruiting distinct projection neuron populations or differentially modifying the activity level and/or pattern of the same population. Due to input from different sets of projection neurons, sensory neurons and circulating hormones, each CPG can generate a set of distinct but related motor patterns (Rosen et al , 1991; Frost and Katz, 1996; Blitz et al , 1999; Marder and Bucher, 2007; Buschges et al , 2008; Dubuc et al , 2008; Jordan et al , 2008). Briefly, the foregut was removed from the animal and pinned dorsal-side down in a Sylgard 170 (K.R. Anderson, Morgan Hill, CA, USA; World Precision Inc., Sarasota, FL, USA)-coated glass bowl in chilled C. borealis saline. Extracellular nerve recordings and axonal loose patch recordings were amplified using AM Systems Model 1700 AC Amplifiers (Carlsborg, WA) and Brownlee Precision Model 410 Amplifiers (Santa Clara, CA).Intracellular microelectrodes were made from borosilicate glass filled with 0.6 M K2SO4 plus 10 mM KCl (current clamp: 20–25 MΩ; voltage clamp: 8–12 MΩ). Extracellular nerve recordings and axonal loose patch recordings were amplified using AM Systems Model 1700 AC Amplifiers (Carlsborg, WA) and Brownlee Precision Model 410 Amplifiers (Santa Clara, CA).Intracellular microelectrodes were made from borosilicate glass filled with 0.6 M K2SO4 plus 10 mM KCl (current clamp: 20–25 MΩ; voltage clamp: 8–12 MΩ). Voltage-clamp gain was 0.7 to 2.5 nA/mV.To facilitate intracellular recordings, ganglia were desheathed and viewed with light transmitted through a darkfield condenser (Nikon, Tokyo, Japan). The VCN-gastric mill rhythm was triggered by extracellular stimulation of the dorsal posterior oesophageal nerve (dpon) (Fig. The POC-gastric mill rhythm was triggered by extracellular stimulation of the post-oesophageal commissure (poc) (Fig. All recordings were aligned to the peak of AB action potentials. A custom written script in Spike2 was used to digitally subtract the secondary unit after manually inspecting the trace to verify that only that particular unit was selected for subtraction.Figures were made using Spike2 and CorelDraw (Corel Corporation, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada). A custom written script in Spike2 was used to digitally subtract the secondary unit after manually inspecting the trace to verify that only that particular unit was selected for subtraction.Figures were made using Spike2 and CorelDraw (Corel Corporation, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada). The gastric mill rhythm (cycle period: ~5–20 sec) is a two phase motor pattern (protraction, retraction) that is usually not spontaneously active in vivo or in vitro (Fig. Stimulation of either the mechanosensory VCNs or the POC neurons triggers a lasting activation of MCN1 and CPN2, which in turn drive the gastric mill rhythm via their synaptic connections onto CPG neurons within the STG (Beenhakker et al , 2004; Beenhakker and Nusbaum, 2004; Blitz et al , 2008). Insofar as these two projection neurons drive the activity of the protractor neuron LG (Coleman and Nusbaum, 1994; Norris et al , 1994), LG also generates pyloric-timed bursts during the POC-rhythm and tonic bursts during the VCN-rhythm (Fig. In turn, several of these projection neurons, including MCN1, excite the AB neuron (Norris et al , 1996; Bartos and Nusbaum, 1997).Each of the four identified CoG projection neuron receives IPSPs that occur during the AB/PD neuron phase of the pyloric rhythm (Fig. Several pathways, including the mechanosensory ventral cardiac neurons (VCNs) and the post-oesophageal commissure (POC) neurons, trigger different gastric mill rhythms despite activating the same two projection neurons, modulatory commissural neuron 1 (MCN1) and commissural projection neuron 2 (CPN2) (Beenhakker and Nusbaum, 2004; Blitz et al , 2008). 