Importantly, only IPP expanded cells were cytolytic towards various tumors, as γδ T cells isolated from fresh PBMC did not lyse any tumors (Fig. For example, IPP expanded PBMC of a single donor depicted in Fig 3A (central dot plot) consisted of 4% CD56+CD3− NK cells, 36% CD56+CD3+ γδ T cells, 26% CD56− CD3+ γδ T cells and 34% CD56−CD3+ conventional αβ T cells. From these populations we isolated γδTCR+ (Fig 3A two right dot plots) and γδTCR− (Fig 3A two left dot plots) cells. All purified populations were tested for cytotoxic activity against SCCHN.As indicated in Fig. To determine the effects of IPP and/or IL-2 on the activation of NK cells we compared the cytotoxic activity of freshly isolated NK cells, γδ T cells and PBMC expanded with IPP + IL-2 against SCCHN cell lines. As expected freshly isolated NK cells killed NK-sensitive K562 tumor cell lines (Fig 4A). As expected freshly isolated NK cells killed NK-sensitive K562 tumor cell lines (Fig 4A). Neither γδ T cells nor NK cells isolated from fresh PBMC were able to lyse Daudi and 012SCC cells. It was shown that the IPP concentration is increased in malignant cells, suggesting that certain tumor cells are recognized by human γδ T cells on the basis of their enhanced IPP production (18, 19). 5D).It has been shown that cytotoxicity of total γδ T cell population can be partially or completely blocked, depending on tumor type, by a combination of anti- γδ TCR and anti-NKG2D mAb (32). While effector function is controlled by both TCR-dependent and TCR-independent mechanisms (20), including activating (NKG2D) (21) and inhibitory (CD94) NK cell receptors,(22) the phenotype of γδ T cells responsible for killing tumor cells is unknown. While effector function is controlled by both TCR-dependent and TCR-independent mechanisms (20), including activating (NKG2D) (21) and inhibitory (CD94) NK cell receptors,(22) the phenotype of γδ T cells responsible for killing tumor cells is unknown. To verify if cytotoxicity mediated by CD56+ γδ T cells involves the γδ TCR and NKG2D molecules, blocking antibody against both γδ TCR and NKG2D were added to wells containing highly purified CD56+ γδ T cells (Fig 5E) and TU159 target cells. We have also observed that the combination of anti-γδ TCR and anti-NKG2D mAb was more efficient in blocking lysis of other SCCHN cell lines by CD56+ γδ T cells from various donors. We have also observed that the combination of anti-γδ TCR and anti-NKG2D mAb was more efficient in blocking lysis of other SCCHN cell lines by CD56+ γδ T cells from various donors. Our results confirmed that many tumor targets, including multiple SCCHN cell lines, are susceptible to γδ T cell mediated lysis (32). Our results confirmed that many tumor targets, including multiple SCCHN cell lines, are susceptible to γδ T cell mediated lysis (32). We determined that only NK cells and CD56+ γδ T lymphocytes isolated from IPP + IL-2 expanded PBMC can kill SCCHN cell lines. Only after activation with IPP + IL-2 the CD56+ γδ T cells become potent anti-tumor effectors. However, combination of these two markers can be useful for detection of most potent anti-tumor effector γδ T cell subsets in vitro and in vivo. However, combination of these two markers can be useful for detection of most potent anti-tumor effector γδ T cell subsets in vitro and in vivo. However, combination of these two markers can be useful for detection of most potent anti-tumor effector γδ T cell subsets in vitro and in vivo. However, combination of these two markers can be useful for detection of most potent anti-tumor effector γδ T cell subsets in vitro and in vivo. However, combination of these two markers can be useful for detection of most potent anti-tumor effector γδ T cell subsets in vitro and in vivo. Our findings demonstrate that CD56+ γδ T cells are functionally capable of SCCHN killing and suggest that these cells may play an important role in the immunotherapy of head and neck cancer. In some experiments unaltered NK and γδ T cells were isolated from fresh PBMC by negative selection using NK cell and γδ T cell isolation kits, respectively (Miltenyi Biotec). To determine granzyme B expression, permeabilized cells were stained with PE-conjugated anti-human Granzyme B (Caltag, Burlingame, CA) or the appropriate isotype control.In most flow cytometry samples at least 3×104 gated γδ T lymphocytes (defined as CD3+ and γδ TCR+) were acquired using a BD LSRII flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ). To determine granzyme B expression, permeabilized cells were stained with PE-conjugated anti-human Granzyme B (Caltag, Burlingame, CA) or the appropriate isotype control.In most flow cytometry samples at least 3×104 gated γδ T lymphocytes (defined as CD3+ and γδ TCR+) were acquired using a BD LSRII flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ). Cytotoxicity assayThe cytotoxicity of IPP expanded γδ T cells, their fractions, and γδ T lymphocytes and NK cells isolated from fresh PBMC was measured using standard 51Cr-release assay, as described previously (31). After 4 h of incubation, the plates were centrifuged again at 13,000 rpm for 5 min and 100 μl aliquots of the supernatants from each well were transferred to a new plate containing 100 μl/well of Optiphase Supermix scintillation fluid (Perkin Elmer, Boston, MA). In some experiments anti-γδ TCR (Clone: Immu 510; Biodesign, International, Saco, ME ), anti-NKG2D (Clone: 149810; R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN), their combination or control mouse Ig (IgG1) were added at 10 μg/ml at the onset of the cytolytic assay before exposure to labeled target cells. To determine the contribution of IPP expanded CD56+ and CD56− cells in SCCHN killing we isolated CD56+ and CD56− fractions using magnetic beads and tested these cells in cytotoxicity assays. 