These observations bear some similarity to the only published example of AA in the B6 mouse strain, in which a specific TCR transgene was shown to target T cells to hair follicles; in that model, while there were histologic lesions similar to the AA observed in C3H/HeJ mice, there were also many histologic lesions that resembled B6 alopecia and dermatitis, which complicated interpretation (22). In mice, AA was also reported to be inhibited via blockade of CD44v10 (29), another immune cell skin-homing marker contributing to disease. In conclusion, maternal IL-6 transgenic expression causes juvenile alopecia that shares some descriptive traits with AA, but whose pathologic mechanism involves follicular dystrophy with some apparent similarities to B6 alopecia and dermatitis. Animals were housed 4–5 mice per cage in Allentown static cages on a 12:12-h light cycle with access to food (Purina LabDiet 5053) and reverse osmosis-filtered tap water, ad libitum. Timed matings were performed by placing 2–4 females in a single-housed male’s cage in the late afternoon and by checking for plugs early the next morning. Plugged females were group-housed 3–5 per cage until E12.5, when they were electroporated and single-housed. Plugged females were group-housed 3–5 per cage until E12.5, when they were electroporated and single-housed. The right hind leg was shaved, and 50 μl of DNA was injected into the middle of the tibialis anterior (TA) muscle. Visible swelling of the entire length of the muscle confirmed correct injection. The mouse was then single-housed, returned to the animal room and monitored daily for the birth of pups and status of pup hair until their weaning at P21. To minimize litter-size effects, statistical analysis was based on litter averages rather than individual pups.For more information, see Data S1. Muscle cells expressed the transgenes, which in pCA-LacZ control mice could be visualized by staining for β-galactosidase activity in muscle fibres (Fig. In pCA-mIL6-electroporated mice, serum IL-6 rose to levels that peaked at 7 days postelectroporation, declining thereafter as plasmid DNA became inactivated (Fig. Mouse models, adoptive transfer experiments and human skin transplanted onto immunodeficient mice suggest that the disease is autoimmune mediated and that T cells play a significant role (3). Litters from mothers expressing high serum IL-6 displayed severe surface hair loss in most or all pups, while litters from mothers with moderate serum IL-6 showed various degrees of surface hair loss, ranging from none to severe (Fig. However, the underlying immunological mechanisms, including the triggering events that lead to breaking tolerance, and subsequent events associated with spontaneous resolution of moderate lesions are incompletely understood. 2d, graph) revealed a significant upregulation of Ulbp1 in affected skin, but not in either source of unaffected skin (ANOVA F2,11 = 8.77; P = 0.008; Bonferroni post hoc: affected vs. unaffected P < 0.05; affected vs. affected head P < 0.05; affected head versus unaffected, not significant). Immunofluorescence imaging of control skin from the pups of pCA-LacZ-transfected mothers revealed few CD3+ γδTCR- (presumed and later confirmed αβTCR+) cells, while CD3+ γδTCR+ dendritic epithelial T cells (DETC) were regularly spaced along the epithelial surface and lining the hair follicles (Fig. Two-way ANOVA revealed a significant effect of alopecia (F1,20 = 22.7, P < 0.0001) and a significant effect of cell type (F2,20 = 9.3, P = 0.0014). To test this, a model of maternal immune activation was used in which pregnant B6 females were electroporated intramuscularly with an expression vector for temporary transgenic expression of IL-6. 