The MDS-UPDRS cognitive testing demonstrates the value of this qualitative approach as a first step before large clinimetric field testing is pursued. The qualitative approach does not provide data for quantitative inference but rather serves as a rich source of information for the scale developer in terms of word refinement, question construction, and clarity. With this technique upsetting or complex words or unclear concepts can be corrected before the large scale effort of full quantitative clinimetric testing. It is a core component of the translation program for non-English versions of the Unified Dyskinesia Rating Scale (UDysRS), and is planned to be incorporated into testing of a core definition of Parkinson’s disease sponsored by the Movement Disorder Society (CG Goetz, personal communication). Six language teams are currently in the process of developing or executing their cognitive pretesting program and will move into the large field testing phase after successful completion (Thai, Hindi, Portuguese, Serbian, Polish and Simple Chinese). Respondents were asked how well they understood the questions and answer options, the concepts being assessed, and particular medical terms or phrases. Respondents were asked how well they understood the questions and answer options, the concepts being assessed, and particular medical terms or phrases. Patients and/or raters were asked about other types of problems such as discomfort with the items, response options or instructions. Patients and/or raters were asked about other types of problems such as discomfort with the items, response options or instructions. In 2001 the Movement Disorder Society (MDS), in response to critiques of the Unified Parkinson’s Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) [1–3], created a Task Force to revise the scale. All sites received human subjects’ approval from their respective institutional review boards prior to beginning the cognitive testing. Cognitive pretesting was facilitated by having both those who developed the revised scale and those who were uninvolved in the development do the testing while acting as examiners. Difficulty ratings were used to indicate where problems occurred. Because the required sample size was small, if only a single rater raised a concern considered important by a patient or examiner, this single concern also warranted scrutiny and possible revision to the scale assuming that the concern could arise in the future for other patients. The iterative cognitive pretesting process stopped when the Task Force determined that only easily resolvable minor difficulties remained. Examiners at each site conducted two to five interviews resulting in a total of 43 cognitive tests, more than double the required sample size. Problems identifiedIn Part 1 of the MDS-UPDRS varying types of difficulties were reported by at least one site for all 14 questions. A few examiners noted that the reading level for many MDS-UPDRS items was much higher than 7th grade level. Most patients had not been interviewed in Round 1. Consistency of terminology was also a concern (e.g., terms such as many, most, frequently). Based on Round 2 testing, sensitive and negative terminology was replaced with more neutral wording; for example “clumsy” eating was changed to “slow with my eating and have occasional food spills”; “use a diaper” was changed to “use a protective garment”.Table 3 shows examples of some of the specific changes made in round two. The “think aloud” method was used in the second round to pre-test self-administered MDS-UPDRS questions and to facilitate documentation of more lengthy open-ended patient responses. A strength of our approach was the combination of pretesting with subsequent data collection to assess the psychometric properties of the scale [10, 11]. 