AP-1 is a critical transcription factor downstream of the RAS signaling pathway and controls a variety of processes, including promoting inflammatory response in cancer (Ji et al , 2019). AP-1 is a critical transcription factor downstream of the RAS signaling pathway and controls a variety of processes, including promoting inflammatory response in cancer (Ji et al , 2019). Specifically, we performed rank aggregation across three lists of genes ranked by differential expression, differential enhancer methylation, and differential enhancer accessibility in order to identify genes that are repressed upon decreased distal regulatory potential and vice versa. More recently, NSD1 has been demonstrated to be a potential prognostic biomarker in HPV (−) HNSCC (Pan et al , 2019), suggesting that a distinct biological mechanism is involved during the evolution of NSD1 MT HNSCC. Although generally not transcribed, those regions tend to be rich in chromosomal contacts, CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) binding sites, and H3K27 acetylation peaks that are characteristic of open chromatin and CREs (Lhoumaud et al , 2019). It is also possible that chromatin compaction due to H3K27me3 spread restricts acetylation or hinders acetyltransferases by direct competition for substrates. Our findings on epigenetic consequences of NSD1 mutations in HNSCCs complement recent advances in understanding the significance of H3K36me2 in cancer. Lhoumaud et al  (2019) investigated the function of NSD2—another member of the histone methyltransferase family that has been implicated in depositing intergenic H3K36me2—in multiple myeloma. Although the downstream epigenetic effects of NSD1 and NSD2 appear similar, mutations in those two methyltransferases are involved in distinct pathologies. A frequent NUP98-NSD1 translocation has been found in acute myeloid leukemia (Jaju et al , 2001), although most likely this fusion does not act through NSD1 overexpression but a gain-of-function phenotype of the resulting protein (Wang et al , 2007). Although some loss-of-function NSD2 mutations are found in HNSCC (Peri et al , 2017), to our knowledge, they have not been identified as statistically significant driver mutations in neither HNSCC nor any other cancer. In genetic disease, heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in NSD1 are responsible for Sotos overgrowth syndrome (Kurotaki et al , 2002), although heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in NSD2have been associated with Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (Derar et al , 2019; Rauch et al , 2001), which is characterized by a growth deficiency. In genetic disease, heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in NSD1 are responsible for Sotos overgrowth syndrome (Kurotaki et al , 2002), although heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in NSD2have been associated with Wolf-Hirschhorn syndrome (Derar et al , 2019; Rauch et al , 2001), which is characterized by a growth deficiency. We carried out an integrative gene set enrichment analysis, aiming to focus on the primary genes targeted by the regulatory cascade. Several pathways, including KRAS signaling, EMT, and inflammatory responses, were downregulated following the loss of NSD1 (Figure 5A). Further mechanistic studies are warranted, which will have significant translational implications for the future development of immune therapies for HNSCCs. Finally, the direct cancer relevance of our principal findings, which were based on genetic manipulation of several cell lines, was demonstrated by the reanalysis of primary tumor data from TCGA-HNSC. Clones were expanded and individually verified by Sanger and MiSeq sequencing of the target loci. Clones were expanded and individually verified by Sanger and MiSeq sequencing of the target loci. Acid-extracted histones (5–10 μg) were resuspended in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8), derivatized using propionic anhydride and digested with trypsin as previously described (Sidoli et al , 2016). The HPLC was coupled online to an Orbitrap Elite mass spectrometer operating in the positive mode using a Nanospray Flex Ion Source (Thermo Fisher Scientific) at 2.3 kV. Two full mass spectrometry scans (m/z 300–1,100) were acquired in the Orbitrap Fusion mass analyzer with a resolution of 120,000 (at 200 m/z) every 8 data-independent acquisition tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) events, using isolation windows of 50 m/z each (for example, 300–350, 350–400…650–700). Fixed cell preparations were washed with ice-cold PBS, scraped off the plate, pelleted, washed twice again in ice-cold PBS, and flash frozen pellets stored at −80°C.Thawed pellets were resuspended in 500ul cell lysis buffer (5 mM PIPES-pH 8.5, 85 mM KCl, 1% (v/v) IGEPAL CA-630, 50 mM NaF, 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM Phenylarsine Oxide, 5 mM Sodium Orthovanadate, EDTA-free Protease Inhibitor tablet) and incubated 30 minutes on ice. Samples were centrifugated and pellets resuspended in 500ul of nuclei lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 10 mM EDTA, 1% (w/v) SDS, 50 mM NaF, 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM Phenylarsine Oxide, 5 mM Sodium Orthovanadate and EDTA-free protease inhibitor tablet) and incubated 30 minutes on ice. In parallel, input samples (chromatin from about 50,000 cells) were reverse crosslinked and DNA was isolated following the same protocol. In parallel, input samples (chromatin from about 50,000 cells) were reverse crosslinked and DNA was isolated following the same protocol. More recently, we provided evidence that NSD1 MT HNSCC samples are specifically characterized by low intergenic levels of H3K36me2 (Weinberg et al , 2019). Library preparation was carried out using Kapa Hyper Prep library preparation reagents (Kapa Hyper Prep kit, Roche 07962363001) following the manufacturer’s protocol. Fragment size was controlled on a Bioanalyzer High Sensitivity DNA Chip (Agilent) and NxSeq AmpFREE Low DNA Library Kit (Lucigen) was applied. Fragment size was controlled on a Bioanalyzer High Sensitivity DNA Chip (Agilent) and NxSeq AmpFREE Low DNA Library Kit (Lucigen) was applied. Fragment size was controlled on a Bioanalyzer High Sensitivity DNA Chip (Agilent) and NxSeq AmpFREE Low DNA Library Kit (Lucigen) was applied. The amplified libraries were purified using Ampure XP Beads (Beckman Coulter), validated on Bioanalyzer High Sensitivity DNA Chips, and quantified by PicoGreen. Cell pellets are thawed on ice and resuspended in 85 to 100ul of 1x RIPA buffer from 10x (cell signaling #9806) and add 1:100 Proteinase inhibitors cocktail (P8340, Sigma) and 0.1mM of PMSF. Collect the supernatant to new tubes and proceed to quantification using BCA-Pierce Protein assay ThermoScientific/Pierce (23227) and use 96 cell microplate flat bottom with 25ul standards every time and 5ul protein samples. Mass spectrometry analysis demonstrates a clear difference in the global levels of H3K36me2 when comparing the mean of NSD1-WT with the mean of NSD1-MT samples (Figure 1A; Data S1). Per-base methylation calling was performed with MethylDackel v0.4.0 (https://github.com/dpryan79/MethylDackel) after excluding biased ends. ENCODE blacklisted regions (Amemiya et al , 2019) were excluded from all analyses. Library size normalization consisted of dividing binned tag counts by the total number of mapped reads after filtering, while input normalization involved taking the log2 ratio of ChIP signals by those of the input (i.e., without immunoprecipitation) with the addition of pseudocount (1) to avoid division by 0. Library size normalization consisted of dividing binned tag counts by the total number of mapped reads after filtering, while input normalization involved taking the log2 ratio of ChIP signals by those of the input (i.e., without immunoprecipitation) with the addition of pseudocount (1) to avoid division by 0. Additionally, quantitative normalization entailed the multiplication of original signal (either in CPM or as log2 ratio over input) by the genome-wide modification percentage information obtained from mass spectrometry.Enrichment matrices for aggregate plots and heatmaps were generated through deepTools (Ramírez et al , 2016, 2018) v3.3.1 using bamCoverage/bamCompare (–skipZeroOverZero–centerReads–extendReads 200) followed by computeMatrix (scale-regions–regionBodyLength 20000–beforeRegionStartLength 20000–afterRegionStartLength 20000–binSize 1000). Motif density was calculated using HOMER (Heinz et al , 2010) v4.11 with annotatePeaks (-hist 5).WGBS analysisMethylation calls were binned into 10kb windows, with per-window beta values calculated as (# methylated reads in bin) / (total # of reads in bin). Unless otherwise stated, such tracks were treated identically as ChIP-seq for analyses involving both assays. Unless otherwise stated, such tracks were treated identically as ChIP-seq for analyses involving both assays. The relative similarity metric is finally defined as the average correlation to KO samples subtracted from those to WT. Rank aggregation was performed using Robus-tRankAggreg (Kolde et al , 2012) v1.1 with aggregateRanks (method = RRA). Unless otherwise stated: Cal27-KO corresponds to replicate 1, Det562-KO to replicate 2, and FaDu-KO to replicate 1. We targeted the SET [Su(-var)3–9, enhancer-of-zeste and trithorax] domain and PWWP (proline–tryptophan–tryptophan–proline) domain of NSD1 because these two domains play crucial roles in catalyzing the deposition of methyl groups to H3K36 (Herz et al , 2013) and reading the methylated lysines on histone H3 (Rona et al , 2016), respectively. The editing was confirmed by sequencing (MiSeq) of the regions surrounding the target sites (Figure S2A; Table S2), and the absence of the protein was confirmed by western blots of NSD1 (Figure S1C). The best currently available treatments have shown promising response in HPV (+) patients but have been less successful in HPV (−) cancers (Ang et al , 2010; Baxi et al , 2012; Chung and Gillison, 2009; Fakhry et al , 2008; Pan et al , 2019). This suggests that the presence of H3K36 methylation within actively transcribed genes is still sufficient to maintain DNAme in those regions. This suggests that the presence of H3K36 methylation within actively transcribed genes is still sufficient to maintain DNAme in those regions. We expanded the analysis by directly considering the H3K27ac states of all annotated enhancers and subdividing them into three subsets: significantly increased; not significantly changed; and significantly decreased in NSD1-KO. We expanded the analysis by directly considering the H3K27ac states of all annotated enhancers and subdividing them into three subsets: significantly increased; not significantly changed; and significantly decreased in NSD1-KO. We expanded the analysis by directly considering the H3K27ac states of all annotated enhancers and subdividing them into three subsets: significantly increased; not significantly changed; and significantly decreased in NSD1-KO. We expanded the analysis by directly considering the H3K27ac states of all annotated enhancers and subdividing them into three subsets: significantly increased; not significantly changed; and significantly decreased in NSD1-KO. NSD1 is a histone lysine methyltransferase that catalyzes mono- and di-methylation of histone H3 at lysine 36 (H3K36me2) (Brennan et al , 2017; Papillon-Cavanagh et al , 2017; Qiao et al , 2011; Tatton-Brown and Rahman, 2013). We conclude that the reduction in enhancer activity has a dominant effect on the regulatory landscape of NSD1-KO cells, in comparison to the non-H3K36me2-associated increase in acetylation.To verify the dampening of cis-regulatory output as a primary outcome of H3K36me2 depletion, we took another orthogonal approach. Because most regulatory effects of intergenic epigenetic changes are constrained by chromatin conformation (Donaldson-Collier et al , 2019; Lhoumaud et al , 2019), especially topologically associating domains (TADs) that delimit the majority of promoter-enhancer long-range interactions, we specifically investigated how these domains impact H3K36me2 depletion’s influence. As an association could also arise due to simple linear—rather than spatial—proximity, we included the distance of genes to their nearest cluster B bin as a covariate together with the status of sharing a TAD in logistic regression modeling (Figure 4). Next, in order to exclude the possibility that we may not be appropriately accounting for the distance effect, the continuous distance variable was substituted with a categorical surrogate to signify whether or not a gene is within a critical distance of the nearest cluster B bin. Finally, in an alternative approach to control for the distance effect, we used resampling to create lists of genes that are equal in size to the set of downregulated genes and have the same distribution of distance to the nearest cluster B bin. 