Fibroblasts are the predominant cell type that synthesizes and remodels the
extracellular matrix (ECM) in both embryonic and adult organs (1) and are the principal cell type responsible for tissue and organ
fibrosis, cutaneous scarring, atherosclerosis, systemic sclerosis, and formation of
atheromatous plaques after blood vessel injury (2–5). Numerous studies have
investigated the contribution of fibroblasts to the progression of carcinoma (6–9),
but, as in the case of wound healing, the identity and embryonic origin of the
fibroblasts that contribute to tumor stroma have not been adequately defined.
Identifying and prospectively isolating the fibroblast lineage(s) endowed with
fibrogenic potential in vivo is an essential step toward effectively manipulating their
response to injury across a wide range of acute and chronic disease states.
Here, we identify an embryonic lineage within the dorsal dermis that possesses
many of the functional attributes commonly associated with the term
“fibroblast.” Despite the presence of other fibroblast lineages in the
dorsal dermis, the Engrailed-1 lineage is the primary contributor to
connective tissue secretion and organization during embryonic development, cutaneous
wounding, radiation fibrosis, and cancer stroma formation. By identifying and
prospectively isolating defined embryonic lineages from skin and oral dermis, we find
that fibrogenic properties are cell intrinsic, reflecting inherent functional diversity
that exists in cutaneous tissues from different anatomical sites. These findings
demonstrate that distinct fibroblast lineages represent unique cell types and take us
one step closer to effectively modulating their fibrogenic behavior in vivo.
Results
Multiple lineages of fibroblasts in the dorsal skinEngrailed-1Cre
(En1Cre) transgenic mice were crossed with
ROSA26mTmG
(R26mTmG) reporter mice (10) to trace the lineage of a population of
En1-lineage–positive fibroblasts (EPFs), defined in
vivo by the expression of green fluorescent protein (GFP), which migrates during
embryonic development from the somites into the dorsal trunk dermis (11) (Fig.
1A). To be sure that Engrailed-1 defines a single
embryonic lineage and is not expressed into adulthood, we analyzed its protein
and mRNA expression at P1 and P30 in dorsal skin and wounded skin and found
absence of expression at these stages (figs. S1, A and B).Fibroblasts were isolated from the dorsal skin of
En1Cre;R26mTmG
mice using a fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS)–based isolation
strategy that allowed for the exclusion of non-mesenchymal lineages (see
Materials and Methods) via a lineage negative gate (Lin–). We
employed this approach in lieu of a positive selection strategy to be as
inclusive as possible and avoid preselection or enrichment of a subpopulation of
fibroblasts expressing specific surface markers. This protocol enabled the
isolation of uncultured EPFs (defined as
GFP+RFP–Lin–) and
En1-lineage–negative fibroblasts (ENFs) (defined as
GFP–RFP+Lin–).To confirm the validity of our protocol, we performed microfluidic
single-cell gene expression analysis of 96 gene targets (table S1) on
FACS-isolated EPFs, ENFs, and unfractionated skin cells (as internal controls)
from adult (P56) mice. Partitional clustering independently revealed the
existence of three transcriptionally distinct cell clusters in dermal tissues,
two of which were well represented among labeled cells (termed here as EPFs,
ENFs) and one of which was not (Fig. 1B).
Compared with the third cluster, the first two were defined by increased
expression of “fibroblast” genes such as Pdgfra,
Vim, P4hb, Col1a1,
Col3a1, and Fbn1, as well as decreased
expression of CDH1, Epcam, and
Pecam1 (Fig. 1C).
Population-level quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR)
analysis of FACS-isolated EPFs, ENFs, and unfractionated skin lysate reinforced
these findings, demonstrating that genes associated with nonfibroblast cells
(adipocyte, endothelial, neuronal, hematopoietic, muscle, and epidermal) were
minimally or not expressed by EPFs and ENFs (Fig.
1D).Microarray analysis of FACS-isolated uncultured EPFs and ENFs from adult
(P56) mice demonstrated that EPFs and ENFs shared a high degree of
transcriptome-wide similarity (R2 = 0.97) (Fig. 2A) and similar expression of
fibroblast-related genes—such as vimentin, decorin, and S100A4 (Fig. 2B, left)—and remodeling genes of
the ECM (Fig. 2B, right). However, key
differences in transcript expression were present, including differential
expression of HOXC10, Slit2, Foxp1, leptin receptor (Lepr), myosin light chain
kinase (Mylk), and actin alpha 1 (Acta1), among many others (Fig. 2C).Flow cytometry revealed the existence of two separate population dynamics
in vivo. At embryonic day 10.5 (E10.5), EPFs represented less than 1% of total
dermal fibroblasts, which at this stage of development were dominated by ENFs
(95.5% of dermal fibroblasts). With time, EPFs increased from 22.2% of total
dermal fibroblasts at E16.5, to 42.9% at P1, and to 75.3% of total dermal
fibroblasts at P30 (Fig. 2D), with similar
percentages of EPFs/ENFs at subsequent post-natal stages (P56).EPFs and ENFs, sorted from embryonic (E16.5) and adult (P30) mice, and
cultured in vitro, displayed similar spindle-shaped morphology characteristic of
fibroblasts (Fig. 2E). The cells were
highly motile, stained positive for markers classically associated with
fibroblasts, such as fibroblast-specific protein 1 (FSP-1) and vimentin, as well
as expressing components of the ECM, including type I collagen and fibronectin
(Fig. 2F), and were negative for
epithelial (keratin 5/14), neural (neurofilament NF-H), adipocytic
(adiponectin), endothelial (CD31), and hematopoietic (CD45) markers (fig. S1C).
Fibrogenic potential of dermal fibroblasts is lineage-restrictedNext, we performed lineage-tracing analysis using
En1Cr;R26mTmG
mice. Upon histologic analysis of dorsal skin from
En1Cr;R26mTmG mice,
we observed labeling of dermal ECM with the fluorescent protein expressed on the
surface of the cell responsible for depositing those ECM components (Fig. 3, A to C). At E10.5, ENFs comprised the
entirety of the developing dermis, and RFP signal labeled all cells and dermal
ECM (Fig. 3B, top panel). At E12.5, EPFs
were observed localizing to the papillary dermis only (Fig. 3B, second panel). Subsequently, at E16.5, EPFs
appeared to migrate to the lower reticular dermis (Fig. 3B, third panel), complete their migration at P1, and maintain
a presence there throughout postnatal stages of development (Fig. 3B, bottom panel, and Fig. 3C). Consequently, the majority of the
deposited connective tissue within the underlying dermis, the stroma associated
with dermal pegs, the stroma surrounding hair follicles, and dermal papillae
(Fig. 3, B and C) was GFP-positive and
hence EPF-derived.To confirm that the observed ECM fluorescence correlated with the
deposition of ECM components, dorsal dermis from adult (P30)
En1Cr;R26mTmG
mice was stained for the predominant collagens (types I and III) in cutaneous
dermis (12), which displayed an
overlapping pattern with GFP fluorescence (Fig.
3D, top and middle panel). In contrast, keratin 14, a marker for
basal keratinocytes and hair follicle epithelium, displayed a nonoverlapping
pattern with GFP fluorescence (Fig. 3D,
bottom panel). These results indicate that, while at least two separate
embryonic lineages of fibroblasts exist within the dorsal dermis, only EPFs
function in vivo as effectors of connective tissue secretion and formation.Analysis of wounded and unwounded dorsal dermis in uncrossed
R26mTmG mice demonstrated the presence of
RFP in all connective tissue fibers within the dermis (fig. S1D) in a pattern
identical to that of GFP in the dorsal dermis of
En1Cre;R26mTmG mice
(Fig. 3, C and E), ensuring that our
findings were not a result of difference in emission intensities between
membrane-bound GFP and RFP in connective tissue stroma. As expected, dorsal
cutaneous wounds in
Tie2Cre;R26mTmG
(endothelial and hematopoietic lineages) and
K14Cre;R26mTmG
(epithelial lineage) mice were completely negative for GFP-labeled connective
tissue (fig. S1E, top
two panels). These results demonstrate that ECM deposition in the dorsal skin is
a property unique to EPFs, with absence of any contributions from hematopoietic,
endothelial, or epithelial cell lineages.We analyzed the dermis of
FVB-Tg(CAG-luc,-GFP)L2G85Chco/J(L2G) mice, which express
cytoplasmic enhanced GFP (eGFP) constitutively in all cells (13) and found that in marked contrast to
the R26mTmG system, GFP fluorescence within the
dorsal dermis of adult L2G mice was localized to dermal cells,
epidermis, and hair follicle epithelium (fig. S1E, third panel), but did not label the dermal ECM to
the degree seen in
En1Cre;R26mTmG mice
(Fig. 3C). Furthermore, GFP
fluorescence highlighted individual stromal and vascular cells within scar
tissue from 6-mm excisional wounds induced on the dorsal backs of adult
L2G mice at 12 to 14 days after wounding but did not label
deposited connective tissue and ECM components (fig. S1E, bottom
panel).Given the important role of EPFs in connective tissue secretion during
embryonic and postnatal development, we next assessed the relative contributions
of EPFs and ENFs to scar formation after cutaneous wounding in the dorsal skin
of adult (P30)
En1Cre;R26mTmG. The
majority of the deposited scar tissue was GFP-positive and hence EPF-derived
(Fig. 3E). Moreover, collagen type I
protein expression within the scar site displayed an overlapping pattern with
GFP fluorescence, implicating EPFs as the primary secretors of collagen in the
healing wound (fig.
S1F). We repeated this analysis using a humanized model of wound healing,
which proceeds through granulation tissue formation and re-epithelialization,
with minimal contraction. Tissues harvested at 14 days after wounding showed
abundant EPF-derived collagen filaments and connective tissue (fig. S1G), indicating
that regardless of the primary mechanisms underlying wound closure, and despite
the presence of ENFs in the healed dermis (Fig.
3F), EPFs are responsible for the bulk of ECM deposition after injury
of the dorsal skin in adult mice.To assess the possibility of a migratory cell lineage contributing to
ECM deposition, including the migratory capacity of EPFs, we performed
parabiosis between
En1Cre;R26mTmG and
background strain (B6) mice. After 2 months, excisional skin
wounds were induced on the dorsum of the B6 strain mice. After
14 days, wounds were harvested and analyzed for GFP/RFP fluorescence. We found
only scattered donor-derived RFP+ cells in the wound site, with a
complete absence of both RFP+ ECM and GFP+ cells (fig. S1H). The absence of
GFP+ cells and RFP signal from wound connective tissue/ECM
indicates that EPFs are not capable of migrating through the circulation to
wound sites and that migratory RFP+ cells were not directly
contributing to scar formation/connective tissue deposition. To further rule out
a connection between the EPF lineage and a migratory/circulatory hematopoietic
niche, we harvested bone marrow from adult
En1Cre;R26mTmG
mice and found a complete absence of GFP signal within the marrow (fig. S1I).Fibrosis can also occur in a slowly developing reactive process, such as
the stromal response to radiation (14) or
carcinoma, particularly malignant melanoma (15). B16 mouse melanoma cells were transplanted to the dorsum of
En1Cre;R26mTmG
mice, and after 30 days, tumors were harvested for histology. Consistent with
previous reports (16, 17), we found multiple host-derived cells
within the melanoma tumor, including various hematopoietic cell types, blood
vessels, and fibroblasts surrounded by connective tissue stroma. The stroma of
the melanoma was predominantly EPF-derived (GFP+) (Fig. 3G). To be sure that Engrailed-1 was not
expressed in response to tumor cells, we stained tumor stroma sections for
Cre and found no expression (fig. S1J). As a positive
control, Cre was expressed in E11.5
En1Cre;R26mTmG
dorsal skin sections, as expected (fig. S1J).We next explored the contribution of EPFs versus ENFs to connective
tissue deposition during radiation-induced fibrosis of the skin. Irradiated skin
was harvested on day 14 and showed gross signs of radiation-induced fibrosis,
including erythema and leathery skin. Histologic analysis revealed a significant
fibrotic response with primarily EPF-derived ECM and an absence of ENF-derived
ECM (fig. S1K). All
blood vessels and hematopoietic infiltrates within the fibrotic tissue were
RFP-positive, as expected. These data further demarcate EPFs as the primary
lineage contributing to connective tissue deposition during embryonic
development, postnatal wound healing, cancer stroma formation, and radiation
fibrosis of the skin.
Fibrogenic potential of dermal fibroblasts is cell-intrinsicTo investigate whether differences in wound repair between oral and
cutaneous dermis (18) are a consequence
of cell-intrinsic versus environmental properties, we analyzed the contribution
of the embryonic neural crest to the cranial and oral dermis, using the
Wnt1Cre transgenic mouse, which permanently
labels early migratory neural crest populations at all axial levels (19–21). The oral dermis from
Wnt1Cre;R26mTmG
was harvested, and Wnt1 lineage–positive fibroblasts
(WPFs), defined in vivo by their GFP positivity (and
GFP+RFP–Lin– by flow
cytometry), were present within oral dermis and exhibited a significant
contribution to connective tissue secretion and organization, as seen by GFP
signal that labeled the dermal ECM (Fig.
4A).However, a population of Wnt1 lineage–negative
fibroblasts (WNFs, defined as
GFP–RFP+Lin– by flow
cytometry) was also present within the oral dermis, as seen by histology and
FACS analyses (Fig. 4, A and B).
FACS-isolated WPFs and WNFs both exhibited spindle-shaped morphologies and were
highly motile (Fig. 4C). These results
indicate that, similarly to cutaneous sites, at least two separate lineages of
fibroblasts coexist within the oral dermis (WPFs defined as
GFP+RFP–Lin– and WNFs defined
as GFP–RFP+Lin–), out of which
only WPFs are the primary contributing lineage to ECM deposition in vivo.Given the role of WPFs in connective tissue secretion and organization
of the oral dermis during postnatal development (Fig. 4A), we hypothesized that WPFs contribute significantly to
connective tissue deposition within the oral cavity after wounding. Full
thickness wounds in the buccal mucosa of adult (P30)
Wnt1Cre;R26mTmG mice
displayed a beehive pattern of collagen deposition within the dermis and a
characteristic epidermal hyperproliferation of keratinocytes (Fig. 4D). The majority of the deposited scar
tissue was GFP-positive and hence WPF-derived (Fig. 4D). The architecture of these oral scars differed
significantly from the dense plugs of connective tissue seen in cutaneous dorsal
scars (Fig. 3E). Consistent with this
difference in scar architecture, collagen content was significantly diminished
within oral wounds in comparison with dorsal skin wounds (Fig. 4E), as seen by decreased blue (collagen) staining with
Maisson's trichrome.To begin investigating the intrasite and intersite diversity in
fibroblast heterogeneity, we compared the transcriptional programs of EPFs
isolated from dorsal and ventral dermal sites of adult (P30) mice to those of
WPFs from cranial and oral dermal sites of adult (P30) mice, using gene
expression microarray analysis. Unsupervised clustering using AutoSOME (22) revealed groups of coordinately
expressed genes underlying similarities and differences among the fibroblast
populations (Fig. 4F), with the most
notable differences identified between EPFs and WPFs (fig. S2A). Indeed,
although each of the four populations (dorsal, ventral, cranial, and oral
cavity) is readily distinguishable by transcriptome-wide expression analysis
(P < 0.05; AutoSOME clustering), EPFs and WPFs
exhibit the highest degree of difference in global expression signatures (Fig. 4G), consistent with their separate
somitic and neural crest origins.To directly assess whether site-specific differences in dermal
architecture reflect cell-intrinsic properties of distinct fibroblast lineages
(Wnt1 neural crest derived versus
Engrailed-1 somitic derived) or are an outcome of distinct
anatomic microenvironments, we initiated reciprocal transplantation experiments.
Ten days after transplantation, both sites (oral cavity and dorsal back)
revealed ectopic deposition of connective tissue that was donor-cell derived
(GFP+). However, the EPF-derived scar tissue deposited within the
oral cavity was significantly different from host-derived ECM, with dense and
elongated collagen fibrils, minimal infiltrate of vasculature or hematopoietic
cells, and exhibited classic dorsal scar phenotypes (Fig. 4H). Although similar cell numbers were transplanted in
both experiments (1 × 105), WPFs transplanted into the dorsal
back exhibited considerably reduced scarring in comparison with EPFs
transplanted into the oral cavity, as seen by GFP fluorescence and collagen type
I staining (Fig. 4H, bottom panels).
Instead of forming a dense plug of scar tissue, as seen by EPFs transplanted
into the oral cavity, WPFs were dispersed around hair follicles, where they
secreted a beehive pattern of collagen deposition (Fig. 4H, bottom panels), mimicking a minimal oral cavity scar (Fig. 4, D and E). We found no significant
difference at 10 days after transplantation, in either cell proliferation or
cell survival parameters between EPFs transplanted into the oral cavity and WPFs
transplanted into the dorsal dermis (n = 5) (fig. S2, B and C). These
data indicate that WPFs and EPFs are functionally distinct populations in terms
of their migratory and secretory programs.Cycles of growth and rest phase of hair follicles within the dorsal skin
cause cyclic change in dermal thickness (23). To investigate whether these changes may affect the ECM
deposition of implanted cells, we transplanted WPFs (1 × 105)
to the dorsal back skin of mice at 4 and 7 weeks of age, representing anagen and
telogen phases of the hair follicle cycle, respectively. We found no difference
in collagen distribution pattern in relation to hair follicle cycle
(n = 5) (fig. S2D). These data indicate that site-specific differences in
dermal architecture between oral and cutaneous dermis are predominantly outcomes
of lineage-intrinsic properties that are unaffected by new host tissue,
regardless of anatomic location, dermal age, or hair follicle cycle.
DTR-based ablation of EPFs reduces cutaneous scarring during wound
healingGiven the role of EPFs as the primary lineage responsible for cutaneous
scar deposition, we next investigated whether ablation of the lineage could lead
to a reduction in scarring.We crossed R26tm1(HBEGF)Awai mice, which
express simian diphtheria toxin receptor (DTR) in a Cre-dependent manner, with
En1Cre;R26mTmG
mice. The resulting triple-positive offspring
(En1Cre;R26mTmG;R26tm1(HBEGF)Awai),
expressing both GFP and DTR in EPFs only, were dorsally wounded and were treated
with either 200-ng diphtheria toxin (DT) in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) or
PBS alone (control).Wound size in DT-treated mice increased from day 0 to day 3 of wounding
(Fig. 5A), implicating EPFs as the
predominant lineage from which contractile, scar-forming myofibroblasts are
derived. Complete healing of DT-treated wounds required 20 days, an additional 6
days over that of control wounds (14 days) and reported splinted excisional
wound healing rates (24) in mice (Fig. 5B). Endpoint analyses were therefore
conducted on fully healed DT-treated and control wounds harvested at 21 days and
15 days after wounding, respectively.Scar size, measured as a percentage of initial wound size, was not
significantly different in DT-treated as compared with control wounds
(P = 0.3192) (Fig.
5C). However, histologic analysis revealed greatly reduced GFP-labeled
connective tissue deposition in DT-treated as compared with PBS-treated controls
(Fig. 5D). Moreover, the overall
pattern and density of collagen deposition differed markedly between DT-treated
and control wounds. Maisson's trichrome staining revealed greater cellularity
and reduced collagen density, evidenced by a higher ratio of red to blue
staining, in treated as compared with control wounds (Fig. 5E). The change in collagen deposition did not
influence the tensile strength of the healed wounds (Fig. 5F) or result in regeneration of adipocytes or hair
follicles in the healed dermis (Fig. 5, G and
H). Taken together, these data confirm an important functional role
for EPFs both in terms of wound closure and connective tissue deposition during
wound healing.
DTR-based ablation of EPFs reduces melanoma growthGiven our finding that EPFs are the primary fibroblast lineage
responsible for dermal fibrosis seen in cutaneous melanoma, we next assessed the
effects of ablating EPFs before melanoma growth. Tumors were allowed to grow in
DT-treated (n = 10) and control (n = 10) mice
until euthanasia was dictated by protocol parameters for a single mouse, at
which point all mice were killed for endpoint analyses. Tumor burden (as
measured by total tumor weight at day 22) was significantly higher
(P = 0.0166) in control melanomas than in DT-treated
melanomas (Fig. 5I). Histologic analysis of
GFP/RFP fluorescence revealed reduced deposition of EPF-derived
(GFP+) connective tissue in DT-treated as compared with control
melanomas (Fig. 5J). As expected,
deposition patterns in the control-treated melanomas of
En1Cre;R26mTmG;R26tm1(HBEGF)Awai
mice (Fig. 5J) closely resembled those seen
in En1Cre;R26mTmG mice
transplanted with melanoma (Fig. 3G).
Surface profiling and prospective isolation of EPFsHaving identified EPFs as a fibrogenic lineage in the dorsal dermis and
established their functional importance through DTR-based ablation, we
endeavored to prospectively isolate EPFs from the dermis of wild-type mice using
flow cytometry methods. As before, a FACS-based fibroblast purification strategy
using a lineage-negative gate (Lin–) was employed to isolate
EPF and ENF populations for all experiments discussed here. Adult mice aged 8
weeks were used.Both surface markers currently proposed for fibroblast
isolations—including CD44, CD90 (Thy1), biglycan, CD73 (fig. S2E)—and 35
additional surface molecules that were identified based on a whole-transcriptome
microarray data of uncultured EPFs and ENFs (fig. S3) were expressed
on both EPFs and ENFs, precluding them as discriminatory surface molecules. We
employed a cell surface marker screen composed of 176 monoclonal antibodies to
assess the presence and relative abundance of each surface molecule on EPFs and
ENFs. FACS analysis revealed that most of the 176 surface molecules in the
screen were either marginally expressed on both populations or were present on
both populations to similar degrees (table S2). For example, CD13 was expressed on both EPFs
(35.2%) and ENFs (28.7%). CD34, a transmembrane glycoprotein thought to be
involved in the modulation of signal transduction and cell adhesion (25), was broadly expressed on EPFs (75.6%)
and ENFs (50.5%). CD47, a surface molecule known to interact with macrophages
and inhibit apoptosis (26), was expressed
on a greater percentage of EPFs (65.5%) than ENFs (24.1%). Thus, although these
molecules cannot be used to uniquely identify or substantially enrich for EPFs
over ENFs, their presence on large fractions of EPFs indicates that they may
hold functional importance. The commonly cited fibroblast marker Thy1 (CD90) was
expressed broadly within both EPF and ENF populations and therefore was
ineffective as a discriminatory lineage marker, consistent with our whole-genome
and flow cytometry analysis (table S2).From the list of 176 surface molecules, we identified several markers
that were highly expressed on EPFs and marginally on ENFs (CD26, LY-51, CD54,
and CD61) (table S2).
FACS analysis of primary noncultured EPFs and ENFs isolated from
En1Cre;R26mTmG
mice identified CD26 as the surface marker offering the highest-fold enrichment
of EPFs over ENFs (nearly 15-fold) (fig. S4A) and labeled a large percentage of EPFs (94%)
(Fig. 6A). The fold enrichment and
purity of EPFs achieved with CD26 significantly surpassed those of the classic
fibroblast markers previously described, such as CD73, CD90, and biglycan, which
either did not enrich for EPFs (CD90 and biglycan) or were limited to a maximum
enrichment of 3.5-fold (CD73) (fig. S2E). WPFs were found to express CD26 at levels similar to EPFs
(fig. S4B).To further confirm the presence and specificity of these markers on EPFs
in situ, we performed immunohistochemical analyses on dorsal dermis from P30
En1Cre;R26mTmG
mice. Consistent with FACS analyses, high CD26 immunopositivity was observed in
regions of upper dermis between hair follicles, but not on the follicles
themselves, and displayed an overlapping pattern with GFP but not RFP
fluorescence (Fig. 6B). Furthermore,
although CD26 has been reported to be a specific marker for upper dermis during
fetal development (27), it appears that
CD26 is also expressed in the lower reticular dermis during adult stages (Fig. 6B).To functionally corroborate that possibility,
CD26+Lin– and
CD26–Lin– fibroblast populations from
uncrossed R26mTmG transgenic mice, representing EPFs
and ENFs, respectively, were FACS-sorted and transplanted via intradermal
injection into the dorsal backs of immunodeficient
RAG-2–/– double-knockout mice.
Intradermal injection induces an initial inflammatory response followed by
fibrosis (scarring) and was therefore chosen as an in vivo assay for ECM
deposition.Histologic analysis of grafted cells at 10 days after transplant
revealed a dermal architecture with abundant deposition of RFP-labeled ECM in
the CD26-positive grafts that was nearly absent in the CD26-negative grafts
(Fig. 6C). Despite approximately equal
numbers of total RFP+ cells, the increased and more diffuse pattern
of RFP-labeled ECM is evident in skin transplanted with CD26-positive as
compared with CD26-negative fibroblasts (Fig.
6C). RFP signal was found to be significantly higher in CD26-positive
as compared with CD26-negative grafts (Fig.
6C). qRT-PCR analysis of RFP-positive cells FACS-sorted 10 days after
transplant from CD26+Lin– and
CD26–Lin– grafts revealed 5.32-fold
greater expression of collagen type I (collagen type in cutaneous scars) and
7.11-fold greater expression of alpha-smooth-muscle actin (a marker of
fibroblast activation) in CD26-positive grafts than in CD26-negative grafts
(Fig. 6D, left). At baseline, this
difference is markedly reduced, suggesting that, although CD26+ EPFs
and CD26– ENFs have similar expression of ECM genes, their
ability to respond to stimuli and up-regulate the expressions of ECM and
contractile genes is one major molecular difference between these populations
(Fig. 6D, right). Together, these
findings functionally corroborate CD26 as a marker for a distinct fibrogenic
lineage in the dorsum of mice.Given the fibrogenic contributions of EPFs to melanoma progression in
the dorsal backs of
En1Cre;R26mTmG
mice (Fig. 3G), we investigated the
contribution of the CD26+Lin– versus
CD26–Lin– fibroblasts to the stromal
compartment of melanomas. Primary fibroblasts were sorted from the dorsal dermis
of uncrossed R26mTmG reporter mice based on their
membrane expression of CD26 and cotransplanted with B16 F10 mouse melanoma cells
by intradermal injection into the dorsal skin of
RAG-2–/– double-knockout mice.
After 30 days, histologic analysis of the transplanted tumors revealed a dermal
fibrotic phenotype with increased deposition of RFP-labeled ECM in melanomas
cotransplanted with CD26+Lin– fibroblasts in
comparison with melanomas cotransplanted with
CD26–Lin– fibroblasts (Fig. 6E). These data functionally corroborate
CD26 as a surface marker for a fibroblast lineage responsible for ECM deposition
after cutaneous injury and melanoma stroma formation.
Inhibition of CD26 reduces cutaneous scarring during wound healingCD26, also known as dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP4), is a cell-surface
serine exopeptidase that cleaves X-proline dipeptides from the N terminus of
polypeptides (28). Given the selective
expression of CD26 on the surface of scar-forming EPFs, we next assessed the
effects of inhibiting CD26 on scar formation during wound healing using a small
molecule (diprotin A), which acts as a selective allosteric inhibitor of CD26
peptidase activity through its function as a slowly hydrolyzed substrate for
CD26 (29).The rates of healing between treated and control wounds during the
initial days of wound healing remained approximately equal. However, a
significant difference in wound size of ~30% developed by day 9 after
wounding, with larger and less healed wounds in CD26-inhibitor–treated
cohorts in comparison with controls (Fig.
6F). This difference persisted through the remaining days of wound
healing. Ultimately, complete healing of CD26-inhibitor–treated wounds
took 5 days longer (P < 0.01) than control wounds (Fig. 6F). Most important, although the rate
of healing was decreased in inhibitor-treated versus control wounds, treated
wounds showed significantly reduced final scar size (P <
0.001) after wound healing had reached completion as a percentage of the
original wound size in comparison with control wounds (Fig. 6, G and H).
Discussion
Fibroblast functional properties: Intrinsic or extrinsic?A critical question concerning fibroblast biology is whether their
specific functional properties are cell-intrinsic or cell-extrinsic. Our
reciprocal transplantation experiments showed that differences in dermal
architecture and wound healing outcomes between oral versus dorsal dermis are
independent of the local microenvironment and can be mimicked by
transplantations of distinct fibroblast lineages, indicating that cell-intrinsic
properties rather than environmental differences are the primary effecting
mechanisms underlying intersite diversity.A recent study also lends support to this notion. Driskell et
al. identified a distinct lineage of fibroblasts involved in
forming the embryonic dermal architecture (27). Our data, along with that of Driskell et al.,
begin to define fibroblast lineages that have different roles in skin
development, homeostasis, and response to acute or chronic injury. The analysis
of the Driskell et al. report and our data implies that
embryonic lineages of fibroblasts represent de facto operational hierarchies
that underlie the diversities of regenerative programs and outcomes between
anatomic sites.Our data describing the fibroblast lineages (En1 and
Wnt1) responsible for scar deposition after wounding of
dorsal skin and oral mucosa also address a long-standing question: Where do the
dermal fibroblasts that deposit scar tissue after wounding come from? In the
internal organs, some have shown that wound fibroblasts are derived from
circulating fibroblast-like cells (30,
31) and that dermal architectures may
be additionally supported by nonmesenchyme lineages (32), as in kidney fibrosis. Our data indicate that within
cutaneous tissues, a distinct and local lineage of resident fibroblasts is
responsible for the fibrosis seen during wound healing, with an absence of ECM
contributions from other mesenchyme or nonmesenchyme lineages. Our data also
indicate that local fibroblasts, not circulating cells, are responsible for the
connective tissue seen in the fibrosis formed in response to both radiation and
carcinoma.
Targeting the fibroblast culprit behind cutaneous scarringOn the basis of CD26/DPP4 expression, we have prospectively isolated the
lineage of cells that is responsible for the bulk of fibrosis, including the
cells involved in tumor stroma. Our mouse data are consistent with reports on
expression of CD26/DPP4 and its related serine protease FAPα (fibroblast
activation protein-α) on stromal subsets of human cancers (33, 34). Depletions of FAPα-expressing stromal subsets from human
cancers were recently shown to inhibit antitumor immunity and suppress tumor
growth (34), and a similar
anti-immunogenic mechanism could, in part, explain the CD26 depletion phenotypes
of our tumor growth assays and slower rate of healing in wound-healing
models.Driskell et al. (27) have recently reported CD26 to be a marker of the upper dermis
during fetal development. Our data demonstrate that CD26 is expressed in both
upper and lower dermis at adult stages of development (Fig. 6B). The Driskell et al. report
initially employs Pdgfrα-GFP transgenic mice (using FACS isolation of
Pdgfra surface expression) to verify and prospectively isolate dermal
fibroblasts from the backskin. Yet, our flow cytometry analysis on adult dermis
indicates that 35% and 87% of EPFs and ENFs, respectively, do not express
Pdgfrα surface protein (fig. S4C). Therefore, a significant fraction of the dermal
fibroblasts assessed in our study are in fact absent from the analysis of the
Driskell et al. report.Given that CD26/DPP4 inhibitors such as sitagliptin (Merck) and
vildagliptin (Novartis) have been approved by the FDA for the treatment for type
2 diabetes (35), it is possible that
blood concentrations of orally administered gliptins may be sufficient to affect
wound healing and fibrosis in patients. If not, clinical trials to test topical
delivery of a CD26/DPP4 inhibitor in a dermal hydrogel or other local carrier
would be an appropriate next step toward clinical implementation.
Materials and Methods
MiceMice were bred and maintained at the Stanford University Research Animal
Facility in accordance with Stanford University guidelines. All the animals were
housed in sterile micro-insulators and given water and rodent chow ad libitum.
En1Cre, Wnt1Cre,
Sox9Cre,
Tie2Cre, K5Cre,
K14Cre,
RAG-2–/–,
FVB, R26tm1(HBEGF)Awai, and
CAG-luc-eGFP L2G85 strains were obtained from Jackson
laboratories. The ROSA26mTmG
(R26mTmG) reporter mice, which harbor a
double-fluorescent reporter that permanently replaces the expression of
membrane-bound tomato red fluorescent protein (RFP) with membrane-bound GFP
after recombination (10), were a gift
from L. Luo (Stanford University). En1Cre transgenic
mice were crossed with R26mTmG reporter mice (Fig. 1A).
En1Cre;R26mTmG
offspring were used to trace En1-lineage–positive
fibroblasts (EPFs), defined in vivo by their GFP positivity, into the dorsal
dermis.
Harvesting dermal fibroblastsMice were killed, and the dorsal fur was clipped; a hair-removal product
was then applied topically to the dorsum for 1 to 5 min, followed by rinsing of
the shaved skin with PBS. To preserve cell viability (36), dorsal skin was harvested immediately using dissecting
scissors by separation along fascial planes and rinsed in betadine followed by
5x PBS washes on ice. Subcutaneous fat was then trimmed and cleaned from the
dermis using a scalpel. Tissue was then incubated in 0.12 mg/mL Elastase (Abcam)
in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM) at 37°C for 25 min to allow
for dermal-epidermal separation. Epidermis was then discarded, and dermis was
mechanically diced with razor blades and dissecting scissors until samples
reached uniform consistency. Oral mucosa was harvested using 3-mm biopsy punches
and dissecting scissors along the buccal mucosa bilaterally and then processed
identically to dorsal skin from this stage onward. After mechanical
dissociation, samples were incubated in 20 mL Collagenase IV (Gibco) at a
concentration of 4 mg/mL in DMEM [no fetal bovine serum (FBS)] on a water-bath
shaker at 37°C for 1 hour. Samples were then passed through a 10-mL
syringe (no needle) 5x and then through an 18.5 gauge syringe 5x, using
“back loading” to load the syringe. Samples were placed back onto
the shaker at 37°C for 1 hour. Enzymatic digestion was stopped by
addition of 10% FBS DMEM, at which time the sample was centrifuged at 1250
revolutions per minute (rpm) for 5 min at 4°C to pellet cells.
Supernatant was removed, with care taken to first remove the top layer of
adipocytes before the remaining supernatant. Cells were resuspended in 10% FBS
DMEM and passed through a 100-μm filter using centrifugation. The
filtered suspension was further centrifuged at 1250 rpm for 5 min at 4°C.
The supernatant was removed and the pellet was resuspended in 10% FBS DMEM and
passed through a 70-μm filter. The filtered suspension was centrifuged
again at 1250 rpm for 5 min, supernatant was removed, and the pellet was
resuspended in ammonium-chloride-potassium (ACK) lysing buffer for 10 min at
room temperature to facilitate lysis of red blood cells. ACK suspension was then
diluted with equal volume FACS buffer and passed through a 40-μm filter.
The filtered suspension was centrifuged at 1250 rpm for 5 min at 4°C,
supernatant was removed, and the pellet was resuspended in FACS buffer
containing deoxyribonuclease (DNase) (10 μg/ml). The cell suspension was
then stained with PacBlue-conjugated CD31, CD45, Tie2, Ter119, and EpCAM for 20
min on ice and washed three times with FACS buffer and centrifuged. Cells were
then resuspended in FACS buffer containing DNase(10 μg/ml) and
4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (1X). FACS sorting (FACSAria III)
for DAPI-negative, CD31-negative, CD45-negative, Tie2-negative, Ter119-negative,
and EpCAM-negative cells (for hematopoietic, endothelial, and epithelial cells)
was then performed to isolate dermal fibroblasts. Positivity for GFP or RFP
allowed for the separation of EPFs from ENFs and WPFs from WNFs.
FACS analysis of dermal fibroblastsAll flow cytometry analysis on dermal fibroblasts described in this
manuscript was performed on dissociated primary dermal fibroblasts after
lineage-negative gating of hematopoietic, endothelial, and epithelial cell
lineages, using CD31, CD45, Tie2, Ter119, and EpCAM (CD326). The following
antibodies were used to interrogate surface marker expression on EPFs and ENFs:
CD44, CD73, CD90.1, CD90.2, CD105, biglycan, CD9, CD26, CD29, CD207, CD184,
CD63, CD117, CD41, CD83, CD49e, CD49d, CD71, CD98, CD157, CD19, CD16/32, CD140a,
CD172a, CD61, Ly-51, CD23, CD115, CD200, CD47, CD51, H2-Kb, and CD183
(BioLegend, eBioscience, Abcam). Cells were stained with a single
anaphase-promoting complex conjugated antibody (above) during the harvest
protocol along with PacBlue-conjugated CD31, CD45, Tie2, Ter119, and EpCAM
antibodies. Cells were resuspended in FACS buffer and DAPI before FACS
analysis.
Immunostaining of cultured fibroblastsFibroblasts (FACS-isolated as described previously from
En1Cre;R26mTmG
mice) were plated into 8-well culture slides for 2 days (BD Biosciences) and
then fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde at 4°C for 10 min and stained with the
following primary antibodies: FSP-1 (Abcam), vimentin (Abcam), α-SMA
(Abcam), type IV collagen (Abcam), type III collagen (Abcam), type I collagen
(Abcam), fibronectin (Abcam), and Thy1.1 (Abcam). Alexa Fluor
647–conjugated antirabbit, antigoat, or antirat antibodies (Invitrogen)
were used as secondary and incubated for 1 hour. Fluorescent and bright-field
images were taken with a Leica DM4000B microscope (Leica Microsystems) and
RETIGA 2000R camera (QImaging Scientific Cameras).
Dorsal woundingFour-week-old male
En1Cre;R26mTmG
and R26mTmG mice were used for cutaneous wound
healing experiments. Both unsplinted and splinted excisional dorsal wounding was
performed on
En1Cre;R26mTmG and
R26mTmG mice in accordance with
well-established protocols. In brief, induction of anesthesia was performed
under 2.5% isoflurane/oxygen mixture at 2 l per minute followed by maintenance
anesthesia at 1 L per minute. Dorsal fur was clipped, hair-removal product was
applied topically to dorsal skin for 1 to 5 min or until depilation was
achieved, and skin was prepped with povidone-iodine and alcohol. Two 6-mm
full-thickness circular wounds were placed through the panniculus carnosus on
the dorsum of each animal at the same level, ~6 mm below the ears and 4
mm lateral to the midline. Unsplinted wounds were dressed with sterile Tegaderm
(3M) at this stage. For splinted wounds, two circular silicone 12-mm diameter
stents (Invitrogen) were placed around the perimeter of each wound and secured
in place with glue and 8 simple interrupted Ethilon 6-0 sutures (Ethicon).
Dressings were changed every other day under anesthesia until full wound
closure.
Oral woundingFour-week-old male
Wnt1Cre;R26mTmG
mice were used for oral wound healing experiments. In brief, mice were
anesthetized with isoflurane/oxygen mixture as previously described. Full
thickness wounds were excised on both sides of the buccal mucosa using a 1.5-mm
biopsy punch. Wounds were harvested 14 days after surgery.
Melanoma transplantationDepilation of the dorsal backs of 5-week-old male
En1Cre;R26mTmG
mice was performed as described previously in the section “Dorsal
wounding.” The B16-F10 mouse melanoma cell line (ATCC) was passaged twice
in culture and injected inter-dermally into the dorsal skin of each mouse (5.0
× 104 cells per injection). After 30 days, a palpable tumor
had formed and was harvested at that stage for histology.
Model of radiation-induced fibrosis (skin)All irradiation was performed using a Kimtron Polaris SC-500 Series II
x-ray machine (Kimtron, Inc., Oxford, Connecticut, USA; 225 kV, 13.3 mA, 0.5 mm
Cu, 1 Gy/min) according to Stanford University Administrative Panel on
Laboratory Animal Care (APLAC) protocol #9981. Mice were anesthetized with a 50%
concentration (1:1 dilution with 0.9% NaCl) of anesthetic cocktail consisting of
ketamine hydrochloride (80 mg/kg), xylazine (2.5 mg/kg), and acepromazine (2.5
mg/kg). The dorsal backs of mice were prepared by removing fur by clipping and
light application of depilatory cream. Mice were placed onto customized
individual lead jigs allowing dorsal cutaneous exposure to a circumferential
region 2 cm in diameter. The dorsum of each mouse was irradiated with 2 doses of
40 Gy spaced 7 days apart. Mice were killed on day 14 after the first dose when
signs of acute skin reactions (erythema and moist desquamation) were
present.
Reciprocal transplantation into cutaneous and oral woundsDermal fibroblasts were harvested for FACS, as previously described,
from the oral dermis of
Wnt1Cre;R26mTmG
mice and the dorsal dermis of
En1Cre;R26mTmG
mice at 4 weeks of age. Harvested cells were stained with DAPI, as well as
PacBlue-conjugated CD31 (1:100), CD45 (1:200), and Ter-119 (1:200), and sorted
for viable
GFP+/CD31–/CD45–/Ter-119–
populations from each anatomical site. FACS-isolated cells from the dorsal
dermis of En1Cre;R26mTmG
mice were transplanted into the buccal mucosa (described previously) of
recipient RAG-2–/– double-knockout
mice (1.0 × 105 cells per site). FACS-isolated cells from the
oral dermis of
Wnt1Cre;R26mTmG mice
were transplanted into the dorsal dermis of recipient
RAG-2–/– double-knockout mice
(1.0 × 105 cells per site). All tissues were harvested for
analysis at 10 days after transplantation.
Histology and tissue analysisFor fixation, tissues were placed in 2% paraformaldehyde for 12 to 16
hours at 4°C. Samples were prepared for embedding by soaking in 30%
sucrose in PBS at 4°C for 24 hours. Samples were removed from the sucrose
solution, and tissue blocks were prepared by embedding in Tissue Tek O.C.T.
(Sakura Finetek) under dry ice to freeze the samples within the compound. Frozen
blocks were mounted on a MicroM HM550 cryostat (MICROM International GmbH), and
5- to 8-μm-thick sections were transferred to Superfrost/Plus adhesive
slides (Fisher brand).
ImmunohistochemistryFor hematoxylin and eosin staining and Masson's trichrome staining,
standardized protocols were used with no modifications. Immunostaining on frozen
sections was performed using the following primary antibodies: type I collagen,
type III collagen (Abcam), type IV collagen (Abcam), keratin-14 (Abcam), CD26
(eBioscience), CD29 (eBioscience), biglycan (Abcam), and FABP4 (Abcam). Briefly,
slides were fixed in cold acetone (–20°C), and then blocked for 30
min in 10% bovine serum albumin with 5% horse serum followed by incubation with
primary antibody for 12 to 16 hours. Slides were then incubated for 1 hour with
Alexa Fluor 647–conjugated antirabbit, antigoat, or antirat secondary
antibodies (Invitrogen). Fluorescent and bright-field images were taken with a
Leica DM4000B microscope (Leica Microsystems) and RETIGA 2000R camera (QImaging
Scientific Cameras).
TUNEL stainingTerminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase–mediated deoxyuridine
triphosphate nick end labeling (TUNEL) staining was performed using DeadEnd
Fluorometric TUNEL System (Promega, Madison, Wisconsin) according to the
manufacturer's protocol. Analysis was performed by counting positive cells per
high-power field.
Micoarray analysisDermal fibroblasts were harvested for FACS from the oral dermis and
cranial dermis of
Wnt1Cre;R26mTmG mice
and from ventral and dorsal dermis of
En1Cre;R26mTmG
mice, as previously described. For all microarray analysis, EPFs and ENFs where
harvested from backskin of adult (P56) mice. Positivity for GFP or RFP allowed
for the separation of EPFs from ENFs and WPFs from WNFs. RNA was precipitated
via chloroform-phenol extraction. Samples were processed for cleanup and
concentration using RNeasy MinElute cleanup kit (cat. 74204, QIAGEN). RNA yield
was typically 0.5 to 1 μg RNA/sorted subpopulations. RNA samples from all
sorted populations were converted to cDNA using SuperScript III first-strand
synthesis system for RT-PCR (cat. 18080-051, Invitrogen) and hybridized to
Affymetrix Mouse Genome 430 2.0 arrays. Microarrays were normalized by robust
multichip average and quantile normalization in R. Cluster analysis was
performed with AutoSOME (22), using the
following settings for gene expression clustering: P-value
threshold of 0.05, 100 ensemble iterations, unit variance normalization of
arrays, median centering of genes, and sum of squares = 1 normalization for both
genes and arrays. The following settings were used for AutoSOME fuzzy
clustering: P-value threshold of 0.05, 500 ensemble iterations,
unit variance normalization of arrays, and uncentered correlation for distance
matrix construction. The fuzzy cluster network (Fig. 3F) was rendered with Cytoscape 2.8.3 (37).
Cell surface marker screeningDermal fibroblasts were harvested as described previously from adult
(P56) En1Cre;R26mTmG
transgenic mice. Cells were analyzed using BD Lyoplate Mouse Cell Surface Marker
Screening Panel (BD Biosciences, cat. 562208) containing 176 purified monoclonal
antibodies and corresponding isotype controls. Manufacturer's staining protocol
was followed with slight modifications. Cells isolated from the dorsal dermis of
En1Cre;R26mTmG
mice were plated into U-bottom 96-well plates at a density of 2.5 to 5 ×
105 cells per well in FACS buffer. Primary antibody incubation
was done in 100-μl volume for 30 min on ice. Next, cells were incubated
with biotinylated secondary antibodies (goat antimouse 1:400, goat antirat
1:400, goat antisyrian hamster 1:400, goat anti–Armenian hamster 1:800)
in 100-μl volume for 30 min on ice. Tertiary incubation with Alexa Fluor
647 Streptavidin (1:4000)—as well as PacBlue-conjugated CD31 (1:100),
CD45 (1:200)—and Ter-119 (1:200), was carried out in 100-μl volume
for 30 min on ice. Analysis was performed using flow cytometer BD LSR Fortessa
with High Throughput Sampler.
Intradermal transplantation of CD26+ and CD26–
fibroblastsCD26+Lin– and
CD26–Lin– dermal fibroblasts from the
dorsal skin of uncrossed R26mTmG mice (at 6 to 8
weeks of age) were harvested as previously described, and 2.0 ×
105 cells from each of these populations were transplanted via
intradermal injection (in 100 μl PBS) into the dorsal backs of
RAG-2–/– double-knockout mice.
Grafts containing FACS-sorted cells alone were harvested after 10 days and
processed for histology.
Intradermal cotransplantation of CD26+ and CD26–
fibroblasts with B16 mouse melanomaCD26+Lin– and
CD26–Lin– dermal fibroblasts from the
dorsal skin of uncrossed R26mTmG mice (at 6 to 8
weeks of age) were harvested, as previously described, and 2.0 ×
105 cells from each of these populations were cotransplanted
intradermally along with 5.0 × 104 B16-F10 mouse melanoma
cells (ATCC) into the dorsal backs of
RAG-2–/– double-knockout mice.
Grafts were harvested 30 days after transplantation and processed for
histology.
Fluorescence quantificationRandomly chosen sections (n = 25) from both
CD26+Lin– and
CD26–Lin– intradermal fibroblast grafts
and melanoma cotransplant grafts were analyzed using ImageJ software. The
“mean gray value” (sum of the gray values of all the pixels in the
selection divided by the number of pixels) for the entire image was calculated
for images taken in the RFP channel only. The mean gray value measuring total
RFP signal for a given image was then normalized to the number of RFP-positive
cells in that image. All data are quantified by a blinded observer from digital
photographs analyzed using ImageJ and Adobe Photoshop CS6 (Adobe Systems, San
Jose, California).
qRT-PCR analysis of CD26+ and CD26– fibroblasts
transplanted into dorsal woundsCD26+ (n = 3) and CD26–
(n = 3) grafts were harvested at 7 days after transplant
(10 days after wounding), digested using Liberase (1 mg/mL in DMEM). Cells
harvested from each graft were then FACS-sorted for viability (DAPI) and RFP
positivity directly into TRIZOL. Reverse transcription was performed with 1 ug
RNA using Taqman Reverse Transcription Reagents (Applied Biosystems), and
qRT-PCR was carried out using Applied Biosystems Prism 7900HT Sequence Detection
System and SYBR Green PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems). Expression of
collagen type I and alpha-smooth muscle actin (alpha-SMA) mRNA was measured.
mRNA amounts were calculated relative to the amount of β-actin mRNA in
the same samples. For primers, see table S1.
qRT-PCR analysis of Cre expressionFibroblasts were FACS-isolated using the fibroblast isolation
methodology discussed previously from the dorsal skin of P1
R26mTmG (n = 3) skin, E11.5
En1Cre (n = 3) skin,
R26mTmG (n = 3) skin, P1
En1Cre;R26mTmG
(n = 3) skin, P30
En1Cre;R26mTmG
(n = 3) skin, and dorsal wounds on P30
En1Cre;R26mTmG
(n = 3) mice. Fibroblasts were sorted directly into TRIZOL.
Reverse transcription was performed with 1 ug RNA using Taqman Reverse
Transcription Reagents (Applied Biosystems), and qRT-PCR was carried out using
Applied Biosystems Prism 7900HT Sequence Detection System and SYBR Green PCR
Master Mix (Applied Biosystems). mRNA amounts were calculated relative to the
amount of β-actin mRNA in the same samples. For primers, see table S1.
Microfluidic single-cell gene expression analysisGene lists defining fibroblast and nonfibroblast markers were collected
from a literature search (38, 39). Single-cell reverse transcription and
low cycle pre-amplification were performed as previously described (24, 40). Briefly, dermal lysate cell suspensions were sorted from
En1Cre;R26mTmG
transgenic mice (at 6 to 8 weeks of age) as single cells into each well of a
96-well plate using a Becton Dickinson FACS Aria flow cytometer (Franklin Lakes,
NJ) into 6 μl of lysis buffer and SUPERase-In RNAse inhibitor (Applied
Biosystems, Foster City, CA) (n = 6 cell lines). Live/dead
gating was performed based on DAPI exclusion. EPFs and ENFs were defined as
previously described. Live, single cells were also sorted as unfractionated
dermis. Reverse transcription and low-cycle pre-amplification were performed
using Cells Direct (Invitrogen) with Taqman assay primer sets (Applied
Biosystems) as per the manufacturer's specifications. Exon-spanning primers were
used where possible to avoid amplification of genomic background. cDNA was
loaded onto 96.96 Dynamic Arrays (Fluidigm, South San Francisco, California) for
qPCR amplification using Universal PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems) with a
uniquely compiled Taqman assay primer set (table S1), as previously
described (41).
Statistical analysis of single-cell dataAnalysis of single-cell data was performed, as described previously
(42). Briefly, data from all samples
were normalized relative to the pooled median expression for each gene and
converted to base 2 logarithms. Absolute bounds (±5 cycle thresholds from
the median or 32-fold increases/decreases in expression) were set, and
nonexpressers were assigned to this floor. Clustergrams were then generated
using hierarchical clustering (with a “complete” linkage function
and Euclidean distance metric) to facilitate data visualization (MATLAB R2011b,
MathWorks, Natick, Massachusetts).To detect overlapping patterns within the single-cell transcriptional
data, k-means clustering was employed using a standard
Euclidean distance metric. Accordingly, each cell was assigned membership to a
specific cluster as dictated by similarities in expression profiles (minimizing
the within-cluster sum of square distances) in MATLAB. Optimally partitioned
clusters were then subgrouped using hierarchical clustering to facilitate
visualization of data patterning (41,
42). Nonparametric, two-sample
Kolmogorov-Smirnov (K-S) tests were used to identify those genes with expression
patterns that differed significantly between population clusters and/or groups,
following Bonferroni correction for multiple samples using a strict cutoff of
P < 0.05. For subgroup comparisons, the empirical
distribution of cells from each cluster was evaluated against that of the
remaining cells in the experiment. Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA, Ingenuity
Systems, Redwood City, California) was used to construct transcriptome networks
based on genes that were significantly increased within clusters (including both
direct and indirect relationships).
Small molecule-based CD26 inhibition during wound healing using diprotin
ABackground strain (B6) mice aged 4 to 6 weeks were
dorsally wounded, and pullulan-collagen scaffolds seeded with either 500 ng
diprotin A + carrier or carrier alone were loaded onto the wound site at the
time of wounding. On days 3 and 6 after wounding, new scaffolds seeded as on day
0 were loaded onto the wound site. Wound healing was then allowed to proceed
unperturbed until completion. Photographic images taken every 2 or 3 days
documented wound and scar size until healing reached completion.
DTR-based ablation of EPFs (GFP+) during cutaneous
woundingEn1Cre;R26mTmG;R26tm1(HBEGF)Awai
mice were dorsally wounded (splinted 6 mm excisional) and pullulan-collagen
dermal hydrogels seeded with either 200 ng DT in PBS or PBS alone (control) were
transplanted onto the wound sites at the time of wounding (day 0). On days 3 and
6 after wounding, new hydrogels seeded as on day 0 were transplanted onto the
wound sites. Photographic images taken every 2 days documented wound and scar
size until healing reached completion, at which point wounds were harvested for
histologic analysis of GFP/RFP fluorescence and connective tissue deposition by
Maisson's trichrome.
Quantification of scar sizeGross scar size is determined by quantifying the area of the scar
relative to the inner ring of the silicone splint on the day all wounds have
completely healed. Scar size is represented as a percentage of the original
wound at baseline (day 0). All data are quantified by a blinded observer from
digital photographs analyzed using Adobe Photoshop CS6 (Adobe Systems, San Jose,
California).
Quantification of the rate of wound healingRate of wound healing is determined by quantifying the area of the wound
relative to the inner ring of the silicone splint at baseline (day 0), 3 days
after each application of hydrogel, and every 2 days. Wound size is then
calculated as a percent of the original wound at baseline. All data are
quantified by a blinded observer from digital photographs analyzed using Adobe
Photoshop CS6 (Adobe Systems).
Tensile strength testingTensile strength tests for fully healed wounds on
En1Cre;R26mTmG;R26tm1(HBEGF)Awai
mice treated with or without DT via pullulan-collagen hydrogel on days 0, 3, and
6 was performed on day 22 and day 16, respectively. Tests were performed with a
microtester (model 5848, Instron, Norwood, Massachusetts) equipped with a 100 N
load cell. The tissue specimens were attached to custom grips with double-sided
tape, giving a final gauge length of 10 mm. The region between the grips (gauge
region) was stretched until a break in the skin was detected by a decrease in
stress with increasing strain. Analysis was performed as previously described
(43). True strain was calculated as
the change in length divided by the gauge length, and true stress was calculated
as the force divided by the original cross-sectional area. The tensile strength
was determined as the greatest true stress achieved. The modulus was determined
via least squares regression as the slope of the linear region of the true
stress-true strain curve (R2 ≥ 0.99).
DTR-based ablation of EPFs (GFP+) before melanoma
transplantationEn1Cre;R26mTmG;R26tm1(HBEGF)Awai
mice were injected (4x) intradermally with either 100 ng DT in 25 ul PBS
(n = 7) or 25 ul PBS alone (n = 7) in four
evenly spaced locations along the circumference, 6 mm in diameter. Twenty-four
hours later, 5.0 × 105 B16 mouse melanoma cells were
transplanted intradermally into the middle of the marked circle on the dorsum of
these mice. Tumors were allowed to grow in DT-treated (n = 7)
and control mice (n = 7) until killing was dictated by protocol
parameters (tumor size >2 cm) for one mouse, at which point all mice were
killed and tumors were harvested for analysis.
Supplementary Material
Supplement`
