INTRODUCTION
In natural and clinical settings, bacteria commonly grow as surface-attached
biofilms—highly structured surface-associated communities, in which most
bacteria are sessile and encased by a matrix composed of extracellular polymeric
substances (EPSs). Such biofilms are known to resist the action of
antibiotics1 as well as
body’s natural immune response,2-4 allowing for the
high rates of morbidity and mortality associated with Pseudomonas
aeruginosa infections.5
P. aeruginosa biofilms are known to secrete numerous
molecules including phenazines,6 a
class of redox-active heterocyclic small-molecule metabolites,7 which are also diffusible quorum-sensing
molecules used by bacteria to regulate gene expression in response to population
density.8. Phenazines have
also been implicated in several functions critical to the survival of the bacteria,
such as biofilm formation and growth. Among the phenazines, the blue pigment
pyocyanin, (5-N-methyl-1-hydroxy-phenazine, PYO) is widely studied because it plays
a primary role in pathogenesis,9
and it serves as a main virulence factor of P.
aeruginosa.10 The
presence of PYO in the cystic fibrosis lung has been directly correlated to lung
damage.10 A significant
factor which suggests the use of PYO as an infection biomarker is that it may be
produced prior to virulent colonization; therefore, it may be detectable before
hospital-contracted infections become symptomatic.11,12
Therefore, in addition to its general utility in following the development of
P. aeruginosa communities, early detection of PYO, signaling
the presence of P. aeruginosa infection, could be used as an
advance indication for the application of antibiotic treatment at the presymptomatic
onset of infection.11 Despite the
promise of PYO as an early biomarker of infection, its detection is challenging,
principally because the matrix in which PYO is secreted is a complex mixture of
bacterial cells, EPS, and a host of chemical messengers, all contained within a
surface-associated complex, the biofilm, which complicates its direct detection.
Properties of PYO (as shown in Scheme 1)
suggest that it may be possible to follow its behavior spectroelectrochemically.
Electrochemical (EC) measurements are attractive because they are rapid, sensitive,
and inexpensive,13 allowing in
situ monitoring of the redox states of target molecules,14 and they can be used to extract quantitative
information about electroactive species, even in complex sample matrices.15 Previous studies have reported EC
detection of PYO at varying concentrations12 and pH values,14 and it is known to be secreted in P.
aeruginosa biofilms functioning under a wide range of
conditions.16-19 However, EC detection provides relatively
little chemical identification information,15 which is required for comprehensive chemical
characterization of complex samples. Thus, it makes sense to couple the sensitivity
and robustness of EC detection with a more information-rich spectroscopy method to
allow characterization of behavior within surface-associated communities over
spatiotemporal scales.
Surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) is a powerful method with the
ability to identify elements of the bacterial secretome using the unique Raman
fingerprint in the 400–1800 cm−1 region.10,20-22 In addition, SERS
produces enhanced signals that lower detection limits relative to unenhanced Raman
scattering, making it a powerful tool for investigating species in situ in complex
matrices.15 SERS has been
applied extensively to studies of biological samples, and it is a particularly
powerful tool for detecting and characterizing microorganisms.23,24
Moreover, SERS imaging offers the possibility of acquiring spatial information about
the chemical compositions of complex samples.25 Recently, SERS imaging of PYO from the P.
aeruginosa biofilm communities on fabricated plasmonic substrates has
been reported.26 Moreover,
numerous studies have successfully used Raman imaging to analyze secreted molecules
from the bacterial communities, such as biofilms, swarming communities, bacteria
under antibiotic stress, and cocultures.5,10 Additionally,
recent studies have extended the power of spatiotemporal mapping in microbial
communities by combining SERS imaging and principal component analysis (PCA) in
order to identify mechanisms of chemical communication in heterogenous biological
samples.5,10,27 In
addition to SERS, other label-free, multiplex imaging techniques, such as mass
spectrometry imaging, have also been employed to visualize components of the
microbial secretome, such as metabolites, lipids, and other chemical
messengers.28-31
In order to realize the potential of combined EC and SERS measurements for
the detection and characterization of PYO and other virulence factors in bacterial
communities, in general, and P. aeruginosa, in particular, it is
necessary to map out the response surface as a function of pH and applied EC
potential for both model and bacteria-derived PYO. Here, we first characterize the
potential- and pH-dependent SERS behavior of PYO in model systems. With this
information in-hand, we proceed to characterize PYO secreted by different P.
aeruginosa strain-derived biofilms, using a combination of SERS and
voltammetric methods applied in situ, that is, under oxygen-rich conditions.
EXPERIMENTAL SECTION
Chemicals and Materials.PYO, KNO3, Ag nanoparticles (AgNPs), and HPLC-grade ethanol
were purchased (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) as were Si substrates (WRS
Materials, San Jose, CA). Copper wire was obtained from Digi-Key, Thief River
Falls, MN. All aqueous solutions for EC measurements were prepared using
deionized (DI) water (18.2 MΩ cm, Millipore Milli-Q system).
Raman Measurements.SERS was performed on a laser scanning confocal Raman microscope (Alpha
300R, WITec GmbH), as previously reported.10 Laser excitation at 532 nm was provided by a doubled
Nd:YAG laser. SERS spectra and images were obtained using either a Nikon 40X air
objective (NA 0.6) or water immersion 60X objective (NA 1.0). SERS images of
biofilms were obtained by acquiring a Raman spectrum from each image pixel (60 X
60 pixels or 3600 spectra) over either a 15 μm X 15
μm or a 10 μm X 10
μm region on the sample with an integration time of
100 ms per spectrum. Individual SERS spectra were acquired using an integration
time of 0.5 s and averaging 10 accumulations. Concentrated 40 nm AgNPs were
deposited onto cured gold pastes on disposable screen-printed devices, which
were used as substrates to increase the SERS signal. Previously developed MATLAB
procedures were used to pretreat the SERS spectra and perform PCA on image
data.16 This analysis
yields a number of components, ordered according to the magnitude of their
contribution to the signal variance. The first and second strongest components
from this analysis, PC1 and PC2, were identified and rendered as loading plots
(score vs Raman shift). Heat maps showing the spatial distribution of PC1 and
PC2 scores were then plotted.
EC Measurements.Disposable screen-printed electrodes (220BT) were purchased from
DropSens (Oviedo, Spain). Each substrate consisted of a 4 mm Au working
electrode, Au counter electrode, and Ag reference electrode. EC measurements
were performed using a CHI 842C potentiostat, (CH Instruments, Austin, TX).
Working and counter electrodes from the screen-printed device were connected
with copper wire to the potentiostat. A proximal Ag/AgCl reference electrode and
60 mM KNO3 supporting electrolyte were used for all experiments, and
pH was adjusted using citrate buffer. A 6 mm thick polydimethylsiloxane monolith
was used to cover the sensing surface and to hold the reference electrode in
place. The scan rate was 100 mV s−1 for all cyclic voltammetry
(CV) experiments, and square-wave voltammetry (SWV) was accomplished by sweeping
the potential from −0.8 to 0.0 V in 4 mV increments, with an amplitude of
25 mV and frequency of 15 Hz.
Sample Preparation.Pellicle biofilms were grown following a previously described
protocol.10 Biofilms
were obtained from P. aeruginosa strains PA14 wt (clinical
isolate strain),32 FRD1
(mucoid, cystic fibrosis isolated strain),33 and PA14 phenazine null mutants
(Δphz).34 Cell
cultures were grown in 6 mL of FAB medium with 30 mM glucose at 37 °C
with shaking at 240 rpm overnight. Pellicle biofilms were incubated at 37
°C in a test tube with 6 mL of FAB medium with 150
μL of 1.2 M glucose, containing 200
μL of overnight broth culture (OD600 = 1)
for 120 and 48 h for PA14 and FRD1 strains, respectively. For non-EC SERS
detection, pellicle biofilms were transferred to Si, after which twice the
volume of a 90 pM solution of 40 nm AgNP solution was added, and the sample was
dried overnight in the dark at room temperature.
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION
EC Characterization of PYO as a Function of pH.The EC response of PYO as a function of pH has been described
previously.12,14,35Figure S1 shows CVs of
PYO at pH 2, 5, and 7. As expected, the redox peak potential shifts linearly to
more positive potentials with pH exhibiting a slope,
ΔE/ΔpH =−63.8 ± 2.1 mV/pH unit,
which is close to the theoretical Nernstian value of the −59 mV/pH
unit.35 Unlike PYO at
pH 5 and 7, the CV of PYO in the acidic form at pH 2 clearly shows two
well-defined oxidation and reduction peaks. At pH values higher than its
pKa ≈ 4.9, PYO exhibits a single
2e−/2H+ transition which shows up as one
reversible peak.35 At pH
values below PYO pKa, the redox peak starts to
broaden, ultimately spitting into two separate peaks. In this state, the
position of the redox peak at more positive potential is pH-dependent and is
associated with a 1e−/1H+ transition, while the
more negative redox peak is pH-independent, indicating that it involves a pure
1e− transfer.35,36 The two
pH-dependent paths are summarized in Scheme
1.
SERS Characterization of PYO as a Function of pH.In order to characterize the SERS spectra of PYO in a system poised for
spectroelectrochemical measurements, a solution containing 500
μM in PYO and 900 pM in 40 nm AgNP was added to the
working electrode of a screen-printed device. Figure 1 displays SERS spectra of PYO at pH 2.4, 5, and 7.
Distinctive SERS peaks at 676, 1355, 1560, and 1598 cm−1
clearly characterize the presence of PYO, as described by referring to
previously cited vibrational mode assignments. 8,26,36,37 The bands near 1355 and 1398 cm−1
have been assigned to complex modes involving C–C stretching and in-plane
C–H bending (with some C–N stretching contribution at 1355
cm−1) of the central aromatic ring,8 and peaks at 676, 1560, and 1598
cm−1 arise from ring deformations.36 The main differences in the SERS spectra
of PYO as a function of pH are (a) lower intensity of the 1355
cm−1 peak and (b) the appearance of a moderately strong
peak near 1398 cm−1 at acidic pH values. The electronic
structure of PYO at higher pH especially the electron density in the center
ring, Scheme 1A, is disrupted in acidic
states, Scheme 1B, due to proton exchange,
which is likely responsible for the changes in the SERS intensities at 1355 and
1398 cm−1. These model compound data make it clear that the
SERS spectra reflect the effects of pH of the local environment.
SERS Characterization of PYO as a Function of Potential.SERS spectra of PYO model systems were also acquired as a function of
applied potential, as shown in Figure 2. It
is immediately evident that the control, that is “no potential”,
SERS spectra without applied potential are almost identical to the oxidized
spectra in Figure 2a,c, at pH 7 and pH 2.4, respectively. This confirms
that PYO is initially in its oxidized form in the laboratory ambient, as would
be expected in an O2-containing atmosphere. However, when reducing
potentials are applied to the sample, the SERS intensity at 1598
cm−1, black dashed line in Figure 2a,c, significantly
decreases at both pH 7 and pH 2.4. Comparing the oxidized form of PYO, Scheme 1A,B, to the reduced form, Scheme
1C,D, clearly shows that the
conjugation of the ring structure is decreased upon reduction, consistent with
the decrease in intensity of the 1598 cm−1 peak ring
deformation mode in the reduced form. Interestingly, the 1398
cm−1 band, which is ascribed to a pH-dependent mode,
changes very little with applied potential, making it possible to independently
assess the effect of pH and applied potential on SERS spectra. Interestingly,
the acidic pathway shows an intermediate redox state, and SERS spectra acquired
at potential intermediate between the fully oxidized and fully reduced acid
form, Figure S2, are
distinct from either fully oxidized or fully reduced forms.
EC Characterization of PYO from P. aeruginosa Pellicle
Biofilms.To study PYO present in P. aeruginosa pellicle biofilms
electrochemically, the biofilms were first formed in a test tube, and then
carefully transferred to the working electrode of the screen-printed electrode
assembly, along with the biofilm residue from the top of the broth and 60 mM
KNO3 supporting electrolyte. SWV was used to characterize PYO
production, as shown in Figure
S4. First, the SWV of the PA14 wt pellicle biofilm with 100
μM standard PYO added confirms the assignment of the
peak at ca. −0.25 V versus Ag/AgCl to PYO. Then, comparing the behavior
between wild-type (wt) and mutant (Δphz) strains clearly indicates that
PYO is secreted in pellicle biofilms derived from PA14 wt but not from those
derived from the mutant Δphz strain. SWV of the FRD1 strain produces a
wave shifted negative by ~30 mV relative to the positively identified PYO
wave obtained from PA14 wt. This may be another phenazine, such as a precursor
of PYO (vide infra). Independent of the exact origin, these data strongly
suggest that PYO is produced in larger quantities from PA14 wt than the compound
responsible for the −0.30 V wave in FRD1 biofilms, although the longer
time (~120 h) needed for the PA14 wt strain to produce a pellicle
biofilm, relative to FRD1 (48 h), may account for a part of the difference.
SERS Imaging of PYO in Pellicle Biofilms.SERS imaging coupled with PCA is a powerful approach to obtain details
of the chemical messaging behavior of complex multicomponent biological
architectures, such as biofilms.10,28 PA14 wt and
FRD1 pellicle biofilms, grown in glucose, secrete significant amounts of PYO, as
shown as Figures 3 and 4. The first principal component of the 120 h pellicle
biofilm from PA14 wt, Figure 3a, shows
strong z-score features at ~1355 cm−1 (combined
C–C and C–N stretch), 1511 cm−1 (ring
deformation), and 1603 cm−1 (ring deformation),36 confirming the secretion of
PYO by PA14 wt. In addition, large signals are observed in the range
1230–1300 cm−1 (amide III) and around 1482
cm−1 (adenine37), which may be assigned to non-PYO components of the
EPS. Moreover, the PC heat maps in Figure
3c,d indicate that while
substantial amounts of PYO exist over the entire imaged region, the high signal
features are characteristically ca. 1–2 μm in the
spatial extent, suggesting that under these conditions, secreted PYO remains
localized near the bacterial cell from which it is derived. Finally, PC2 from
the PA14 wt analysis shows features near 1600 cm−1, which were
identified in 2 as being associated with oxidizing local
environment, suggesting that this is the character of the local pellicle biofilm
environment.PCA of the 48 h FRD1 pellicle biofilm, Figure 4, shows both similarities and differences relative to the
PCA of 120 h PA14 wt. PC1 presents distinct features at 1351, 1560, and 1627
cm−1. The first, and strongest feature at 1351
cm−1, matches reasonably well with the phenazine ring
stretch (1355 cm−1) from PA14 wt. However, even though the
bands at 1560 and 1627 cm−1 from the FRD1 sample align with
previously published features of PYO (different ring deformations), they do not
reproduce the strong features from the PCA of the PA14 wt SERS image.36 Furthermore, the SWV data,
Figure S4, show
that the wave obtained from FRD1 is shifted to more negative potentials by 30
mV—a small but significant shift. Taken together, the shift in the
position of the SWV wave coupled with the distinct peaks in the SERS PCA
analysis suggest that another component may be present in the FRD1 sample in
sufficient quantities to determine the overall spectroelectrochemical behavior.
Two possibilities, phenazine-1-carboxamide and phenazine-1-carboxylic acid, are
sufficiently close in structure to be plausible. Finally, the PC heat map for
PC1, Figure 4c, exhibits the same
1–2 μm in spatial extent features observed in the
PA14 wt sample behavior, which can reasonably be ascribed to the same
explanation, that is localized phenazine secretion.
EC–SERS of PYO from Bacterial Communities.Finally, we examined the SERS spectra of pellicle biofilms under EC
potential control, that is EC–SERS, as shown in Figure 5. The SERS spectra from the heterogeneous
biofilms, without extraction, should reflect the presence not only of PYO but
also other component characteristic of both the secretome and the cells making
up the biofilm, Figure
S5. Major peaks are observed at 1227, 1307, 1361, 1410, 1574, and
1605 cm−1, all of which are consistent in the position between
oxidizing and reducing conditions. The major differences between SERS spectra
acquired under different redox conditions are the decrease in intensity of the
1605 cm−1 band under reducing conditions. The intensity
behavior of the band is similar to that observed for comparable bands (1600
cm−1) in the PYO model spectra, Figure 2, in the reduced state. Furthermore, SERS
spectra obtained from FRD1 pellicle biofilms as a function of applied potential
plotted in Figure S6
show the same trend—spectral intensities are even more reduced at
reducing potentials than that for PA14 wt. The reduced SERS intensities for FRD1
under reducing conditions could plausibly arise either because the molecular
components responsible for the bands are down-regulated and thus do not appear
as abundantly in the secretome or because the intrinsic light scattering cross
section is diminished under reducing conditions. The fact that the PYO standard
spectra shown in Figure 2 exhibit similar
behavior as the PA14 wt pellicle biofilm indicates that the latter explanation
plays a role in explaining the potential-dependent behavior of the SERS
intensities.
CONCLUSIONS
Pathogenic bacteria such as P. aeruginosa often express
numerous virulence factors that enable bacterial growth of human cells in
concurrence with disease. At present, there are no diagnostic tools to distinguish
infected cells from healthy cells in vivo. In this study, we have characterized the
virulence biomarker, PYO, through combined EC and SERS experiments applied both to
model PYO systems and to pellicle biofilms derived from PA14 wt, FRD1, and
Δphz mutant strains of P. aeruginosa under varying
conditions of pH and applied potential. Specific molecular information related to
electron transfer events of PYO in biofilm communities was obtained with both
electrochemistry (square-wave and CV) and SERS applied to pellicle biofilms in situ.
This confirms that specific virulence molecules such as PYO can be detected in early
stages of infection and suggests that EC–SERS may be applicable to the
detection of other bacterial biomarkers in P. aeruginosa, as
well.
With respect to the use of PYO as a molecular sentinel in bacterial
communities, a number of interesting observations were made. Both SERS spectra and
EC behavior change with pH, and several pH-dependent bands were identified in the
SERS spectra, which can potentially be used to probe the local environment. A
comparison of the SWV behavior between PA14 wt and Δphz mutant strains
unequivocally identified PYO as a major component of the secretome.
Spectroelectrochemical studies began with the observation of decreasing SERS
intensities of PYO standard under reducing conditions. Extending these experiments
to pellicle biofilms showed similar behavior with applied potential, and SERS
imaging indicated that secreted PYO was localized in regions approximately the size
of P. aeruginosa cells. Altogether, the combination of SERS and
electrochemistry is a powerful tool for the characterization of the P.
aeruginosa secretome and its behavior under varying pH and applied
potential conditions.
Supplementary Material
Ref.280 SI
