1
Introduction
Narcolepsy with cataplexy (NC) is a neurological sleep disorder found in approximately one in 3,000 individuals. It is characterized by sleep-wake instability, rapid eye movement (REM) sleep abnormalities and cataplexy. The pathophysiology of the disorder is a selective destruction of hypocretin/orexin neurons in the hypothalamus,1–3 resulting in low or undetectable levels of hypocretin-1 in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).4,5 The loss of hypocretin neurons is thought to be of autoimmune origin,6 although this is not yet fully established.
Hypocretin neurons play a central role in the regulation of sleep-wake transitions7–9 and in the stabilization of the REM and non-REM (NREM) sleep states. REM sleep is a physiological state that includes loss of consciousness, fast EEG activation with dreaming, muscle atonia, phasic events such as REMs and muscle twitches, elevated arousal threshold, and other features (erection, temperature dysregulation, cardiovascular changes). Narcoleptic patients have been shown to have many clinical symptoms linked to abnormal REM sleep, including sleep paralysis, hypnagogic hallucinations and REM sleep behavior disorder.10 In addition, abnormal distribution of REM sleep, 11 increased density of REMs and abnormal EEG frequency during REM sleep are found during nocturnal sleep polysomnography (PSG). 11 Finally, nocturnal sleep fragmentation and increased NREM sleep stage 1 (N1) amounts12–14 are typical PSG findings. None of these PSG findings are used in the diagnosis of narcolepsy.
Studies in both animals and humans have shown that rapid transitions from wake to REM sleep is a diagnostic hallmark of narcolepsy.7,15 On the basis of this finding, rapid onsets into REM sleep (latency from sleep onset to REM sleep ≤15 minutes (SOREMP)) during nocturnal PSG and during daytime napping (measured by the Multiple Sleep Latency Test (MSLT)) are used to diagnose narcolepsy.15,16 Whereas a SOREMP at night is highly specific (99%), it is only modestly sensitive (~45%) thus many patients are missed.15 It has the advantage, however, of being theoretically feasibly assessed using home recordings, and its evaluation is required prior to the MSLT to exclude sleep deprivation. In contrast, a positive MSLT (mean sleep latency (MSL) of ≤8 minutes as well as presence of ≥2 SOREMPs) is both sensitive (90–95%) and specific (95%), but time consuming and expensive.
Considering that the distribution of REM sleep itself is also abnormal in NC, we postulated that the frequency distribution of the sleep EEG power spectra may be consistently changed in NC patients and that this could be used as a diagnostic feature during nocturnal PSGs. Such abnormality has been shown in hypocretin knockout mice compared to wild type mice17 as well as in narcoleptic patients, notably during sleep paralysis and cataplexy.11 In this study, we aimed at quantifying the diagnostic value of Power Spectra Density (PSD) features extracted from the EEG in all sleep stages. In particular, we were seeking to identify features with high specificity (>95%) that could be added to a nocturnal SOREMP to raise sensitivity without lowering specificity. Our ultimate goal is to be able to identify NC patients using features extracted from a nocturnal PSG alone, avoiding the need for a subsequent time consuming MSLT.
2
Materials and methods
2.1Subjects and recordingsTwo PSG data sets similar to those described in Andlauer et al.15 were used. The first was considered a training data set, the second a validation data set. In these samples, NC was clinically defined as narcolepsy with clear cataplexy and HLA-DQB1*06:02, forward in this study referred to as NC patients.In the training data set, PSGs from 136 NC patients were gathered from the Stanford Sleep Clinic as well as from two sodium oxybate drug trials (baseline sleep studies) conducted by Jazz Pharmaceuticals.18,19 In these trials, patients were not treated with sodium oxybate, but antidepressants and centrally acting stimulants were allowed if used at a stable dose. A total of 39% and 79% of the patients in these trials were treated with antidepressants and stimulants, respectively. Patients were age- and sex-matched with controls obtained from volunteers drawn from the Wisconsin Sleep Cohort; an ongoing longitudinal population-based study of sleep patterns in the general population.20 A stratified random sample of employed adults aged 30–60 years in south Wisconsin was recruited for a nocturnal PSG at baseline. These subjects are randomly selected and have not been screened for sleep disorders, and as such a significant portion has sleep disordered breathing,15 periodic leg movements during sleep,21 parasomnias, depression etc. Only four subjects were excluded as they have been suggested to possibly have narcolepsy in a prior study.22 A case/control ratio of 4 was used giving a total of 510 control subjects in the training dataset. Antidepressants such as serotonin specific reuptake inhibitors were taken by approximately 22% and stimulants, mostly methylphenidate, were taken by less than 2% of the control subjects. This was considered acceptable as doses were stable, and as we explored separately medication effects on our results. As with patients, non-narcolepsy controls were allowed to take usual medications such as over-the-counter antihistamine and pain-relievers.As we aimed to find features that can help identify narcoleptic patients in a clinical setting, the validation dataset included subjects referred to and evaluated at a sleep clinic, the Stanford Sleep Clinic. As such these subjects are more enriched in sleep pathologies than the other sample, notably sleep disordered breathing. This dataset included a total of 727 patients, whereof 19 were diagnosed as NC patients (untreated when tested) and 708 were non-narcoleptic patients diagnosed with sleep disorders other than narcolepsy, most notable sleep apnea. The sample has been described elsewhere,15,21 and all evaluation included a comprehensive medical and medication history, nocturnal PSG and, for narcolepsy cases, a PSG-MSLT. As the validation is a clinical sample, it is unbalanced in numbers of cases versus non-cases and is not matched in age or gender. The demographics for the training and validation dataset can be seen in Table 1.Data used in this study was heterogeneous and collected over a long historical period using Rechtschaffen & Kales (R&K)23 or American Academy of Sleep Medicine (AASM)24 criteria. For consistency, stage S4 was replaced as N3 for recordings scored using the older R&K criteria. We realize that the use of two sets of rules could have affected our results. The rules do, however, mostly differ in the transitions to and from N1, and as we have excluded epochs before and after any sleep stage transition, these methodological differences are unlikely to have affected the results. Optimally, spectra could be extracted from automatically scored hypnograms to limit differences in scoring – both across the two standards and also across sites and scorers. This would, however, introduce new challenges as no automatic scoring method has proven to be valid in narcoleptic patients.
2.2Cleaning of EEGFigure 1 illustrates the overall methodology of this study. To ensure minimum contamination by artifacts of the PSD spectra for each sleep stage, a set of successive cleaning procedures was followed starting with the removal of signal surrounding sleep transitions as well as signal contaminated with electromyography (EMG) artifacts.Sleep stage transitions were identified using the manually scored hypnogram as epochs going from any stage (N1, N2, N3, REM or W) to another. EEG in epochs neighboring stage transitions was excluded from the analysis to minimize “mixed” stage 30 sec epochs.The entire EEG recorded at the C3-A2 derivation was passed through a muscle artifact detector described in details in Brunner et al.25 This detector is a widely used method and compares high frequency activity in each 4-s window with the activity level in a local 3-min window surrounding the 4-s window. If the value in the 4-s window exceeded the local background activity by a factor of four, it was flagged as artifact and removed.The PSGs of NC patients in the training dataset were recorded with different sampling frequencies with some older recordings being sampled with a sampling frequency of 100 Hz, a frequency below newest standards. Power spectra was thus analyzed up to 35 Hz for all, which, is reliable according to Nyquist Theorem.26 Due to aliasing, power-line noise at 60 Hz appeared at 40 Hz and 20 Hz, with the latter of the two interfering with EEG power analyzed in this study (up to 35 Hz). To minimize differences between recordings of controls and NC patients in the training dataset and remove artifactual power-line noise, a notch filter at 20 Hz was applied to all signals after downsampling to 100 Hz by use of MATLAB’s (R2012b 8.0.0.783, The MathWorks Inc., Natick, MA, 2012) resample function. This resamples the data at (fs_new/fs_original) times the original sampling rate, using a polyphase filter implementation. The resampled signals were filtrated forward and reversed with a notch filter with a bandwidth of 1.14 Hz at −3 dB. Visual inspection of the signals and spectra showed that the notch filter had negligible effect on frequencies in a 2-Hz window around 20 Hz.
2.3Feature extractionSpectral analysis of the sleep EEG was performed using the non-overlapping Welch method with a Hanning window as the windowing function.27,28 Specifically, MATLAB’s periodogram function was used to calculate the EEG PSD in 4-s non-overlapping Hanning-weighted windows. If any sample in a given 4-s window had a spectrum above 1000 μV2/Hz (electrode pop) or all had a spectrum below 0.1 μV2/Hz (flatline), the 4-s window was excluded from further analysis.All features analyzed in this study were computed based on the spectra of 4-s windows. The spectra were sorted according to the sleep stage, and the sleep stage specific spectra were normalized in two different ways:
Sum = 1: Each of the sleep stage specific spectra was divided by their own sum in the frequency range 0.5–35 Hz such that the sum of the normalized PSD was 1. This normalization was done to minimize the potential hardware-induced differences between sites.Subtract Stage: For the W, N1 and REM specific spectra, the mean spectrum was subtracted by the mean spectrum of any of the two other stages. The subtraction was performed on sample-basis and as the order of the subtraction is inconsequential (i.e. N1–W will be the negative of W–N1), only one subtraction between two stages was done. This normalization approach was chosen to minimize frequency specific artifacts and because the differences between these sleep stages were thought to be the most interesting when analyzing NC.The mean spectrum of each stage and normalization was calculated, resulting in eight mean spectra (five stages from Sum=1 plus three Subtract Stage normalizations).To reduce the number of features to be included in the feature selection approach, we first compared mean spectra in NC versus controls in the various sleep stages using one-sided t-tests testing for significance for every frequency sample in the frequency range 0.5–35 Hz. Areas in which all the samples within a range of at least 1 Hz showed either a significantly higher or lower NC mean curve compared to controls were selected as feature areas, leading to 23 contiguous frequency areas. For each of these feature areas, a feature value was computed as the sum of the sample values of the specific mean PSD spectra. Due to power line interference and notch filtration at 20 Hz, frequencies between 19 Hz and 21 Hz were not included in the computation of the these features, albeit knowing that we missed opportunities for potential group-differences in this frequency range. Additional features computed included the sum of the sample PSD values in the standard clinical frequency bands: delta (0.5–4Hz), theta (4–8Hz), alpha (8–11Hz), sigma (11–16Hz) and beta (16–25Hz) for each of the eight mean spectra, leading to the selection of an additional 5 × 8 = 40 features and a grand total of 63 features. The frequencies surrounding 20 Hz were included in the computation of features based on the classical beta band, albeit knowing that these frequencies are affected by the notch filtration.
2.4Feature selection and classificationAs a combined feature selection and classification approach we used logistic regression with Lasso regularization (LASSO), as this method leaves out irrelevant or redundant features yielding simple models.29,30 Further, the model coefficients are easy to interpret and the features included in the final model are easy to rank. In regular logistic regression, a logistic sigmoid function is used to model the posterior probability of the positive class for an input variable y:29p(positive∣y)=11+e−(β0+βTy)
where β0 is the model offset and β is a vector of variable coefficients. The final classification is made by defining the decision boundary β0 + βTx = 0 for the logit transformation
logp(positive∣y)1−p(positive∣y)=β0+βTyThe Lasso regularization controls the complexity of the model by introducing a regularization term λ > 0 in the optimization problem:
argmax(β0+β){∑i=1I[zi(β0+βTyi)−log(1+eβ0+βTyi)]−λ∑d=1D|βd|}
where I is the number of subjects, D is the dimension of the input variable, and zi states the classification output as 1 for positive cases (NC) and 0 for negative cases (non-NC). Increasing the regularization term will decrease the number of nonzero components of β, and the model becomes sparser, as only the features with nonzero components are included. Additionally, the component values indicate each feature’s impact on the final posterior probability output, and can be used to rank the features.The training dataset was used to optimize the LASSO model applying 10-fold cross-validation, where the feature values were standardized before given as input. Ten LASSO model were built using this procedure, and the final model was selected as the one giving the highest Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic (ROC) Curve (AUC) value. The final LASSO model was used to classify the NC patients in both the training and validation dataset. For the features included in the final model, we also compared the median value of each feature individually in both the training and validation datasets. Finally, for features that replicated in the validation dataset, ROC curves were drawn on both datasets and cut off thresholds were selected to desired specificity and sensitivity. Because our goal is to add these features to short REM latency as a diagnostic tool, we selected cut offs that had high specificity (>95%) even in the presence of low sensitivity.
3
Results
3.1Automatic Selected Feature SubsetThe resulting feature subset contained 13 features, summarized in Table 2. Based on the training dataset, the NC patients were found to have:
increased N1 PSD in the 21–35 Hz range as percent of total PSD in N1increased N3 PSD in the 21–35 Hz range as percent of total PSD in N3increased REM PSD in the alpha power range (8–11 Hz) as percent of total PSD in REMincreased W PSD in the 21–35 Hz range as percent of total PSD in Wincreased REM PSD in the 21–35 Hz range as percent of total PSD in REMdecreased W PSD in the sigma power range (11–16 Hz) as percent of total PSD in Wdecreased REM PSD in the 1.5–7 Hz range as percent of total PSD in REMincreased N2 PSD in the 21–35 Hz range as percent of total PSD in N2decreased differential PSD of N1 subtracted by W in the delta power range (0.5–4 Hz)decreased N2 PSD in delta power range (0.5–4 Hz) as percent of total PSD in N2decreased N2 PSD in the 2–7 Hz range as percent of total PSD in N2increased differential PSD of REM subtracted by N1 in the delta power range (0.5–4 Hz)increased W PSD in the 17–19 Hz range as percent of total PSD in WThe final LASSO model including the 13 features yielded an accuracy of 89.2%, an AUC of 94.0%, a sensitivity of 53.7% and a specificity of 98.6% on the training dataset, and an accuracy of 70.3%, an AUC of 48.0%, a sensitivity of 26.3% and a specificity of 71.5% on the validation dataset. The performance results are seen in Table 3. All performance measures of the validation data dropped considerable compared to the training data when using the final LASSO model as classification approach.
3.2Individual analysis of 13 selected features and reduction to 3 final featuresTo further analyze why the performance of the final model varied so much between the two datasets, the values of the 13 features were plotted for NC versus non-NC subjects for both datasets. Different combinations of the 13 features were also investigated to enhance their performance. For instance, the combination feature 6/feature 4 (W PSD in the 11–16 frequency range relative to the 21–35 Hz frequency range) was investigated by boxplot as these two features are computed from the same spectrum and stage. Based on visual inspection of box plots and ROC curves for the 13 features, it was found that only the trends for feature 3 (REM PSD in the alpha frequency range (8–11 Hz), as percent of total PSD in REM), feature 6 (W PSD in the sigma frequency range (11–16 Hz), as percent of total PSD in W) and feature 9 (differential PSD in N1 subtracted to W in the delta frequency range (0.5–4Hz)) had a consistent difference in both datasets. All other features and feature combinations did not improve performance in the same way for the two datasets as they either had opposite effects for the two datasets (feature number 1, 4, 5, 7, 10, 11 and 13), a large drop in AUC measure from training data to validation data (feature number 8) or a validation ROC curve showing loss of specificity. Table 2 reports on the AUC measure and the feature effects for the two datasets.Box plots and ROC curves obtained for the three features that were predictive in both datasets are shown in Figure 2. As mentioned in the introduction, we elected to select cut offs that gave a high specificity (a minimum of 97%) at the expense of sensitivity. The cut offs were thus chosen to be at the value for which a minimum of 97% specificity was obtained on the training dataset. The points for the selected cut offs are marked on the ROC curves together with the optimal point when sensitivity and specificity were ranked equally. As can be seen in Figure 2, REM power in the alpha range (8–11 Hz) as percent of total power in REM above 0.16 gave a sensitivity of 9.6% and a specificity of 97.1% in the training dataset, and a sensitivity of 5.3% and a specificity of 97.2% in the validation dataset. Wake power in the sigma range (11–16 Hz) as percent of total power in wake below 0.04 gave a sensitivity of 2.9% and a specificity of 97.3% in the training dataset and a sensitivity of 10.5% and a specificity of 98.4% in the validation dataset. N1-W power in the delta range (0.5–4 Hz) below −116.83 gave a sensitivity of 9.6% and a specificity of 97.1% in the training dataset and a sensitivity of 15.8% and a specificity of 96.5% in the validation dataset. The performance measures for the feature threshold approaches are seen in Table 3.The mean PSD ± the standard error of the mean (SEM) curves for the NC patients and control subjects/non-narcoleptics for the three features that were predictive in both datasets are provided in Figure 3. As can be seen, the NC patients in the training dataset showed increased percentage REM PSD and decreased percentage wake PSD and N1-W PSD compared to controls within the marked areas. Similar overall trends are seen in the validation dataset although the mean PSD curves differ slightly between the two datasets.
3.3Influence of medication on the three identified featuresTo investigate if medication influenced diagnostic predictability for the final features we identified, the two datasets were combined and divided into 1) those taking antidepressants versus not, 2) those taking stimulants versus not, and 3) those taking antidepressants and/or stimulants versus neither. We next computed sensitivity and specificity for the features in each of these subgroups (Table 4). Finally, we used logistic regression models to examine how the features were influenced by age, sex, antidepressants and stimulants.Table 4 reports on sensitivity and specificity measures and positive and negative predictive values (PPV and NPV) for the final three features in each subset. As can be seen, sensitivity for alpha activity in REM sleep was slightly lower in non-medicated subgroups, whereas specificity was similar across all subgroups. In contrast, sensitivity of sigma power in wakefulness was slightly higher in non-medicated subgroups with no effect on specificity. For the feature reflecting delta power in the N1-W domain, specificity was slightly lower in the medicated subgroups. It should be emphasized that adding any of the new features thus reduced the positive predictive value (PPV).To account for interactions between narcoleptic status and medication effects, we also performed separate analyses for narcoleptic patients (Table 5) and control subjects (Table 6). In narcolepsy patients, neither antidepressants nor stimulants were found to have significant effects on any of the features. Interestingly, however, age was found to have a significant effect on alpha power in REM sleep (OR = 1.08 (1.03–1.14), p<0.005).In controls and non-narcoleptics, antidepressants had no significant effect on any of the features. Stimulants however had significant effects on delta power PSD differences in N1 minus W (OR=3.21 (1.34–7.71), p<0.01). For this feature, we found that stimulants increased the probability of occurrence of the feature, but as very few controls and non-narcoleptics express this feature (≤4%), the result should be taken with caution. Our data also indicated that older age significantly increased the occurrence of the alpha in REM sleep feature (OR = 1.04 (1.01–1.07), p<0.05) and slightly decreased occurrence of the sigma in wakefulness feature (OR = 0.96 (0.93–0.99), p<0.01). Finally, our data suggested that male subjects have a lower probability of expressing the sigma power in wakefulness feature (OR = 0.42 (0.18–0.97), p<0.05) and the delta power in the differential PSD N1-W feature (OR = 0.29 (0.14–0.60), p<0.001).To investigate whether the features add value when combined with a nocturnal SOREMP, we computed sensitivity and specificity when NC patients were diagnosed based on the presence of a nocturnal SOREMP or any of the features (Table 7). In all cases, sensitivity increased at the expense of specificity when adding any of the new features to the presence of a nocturnal SOREMP. The new features increased sensitivity by 3.2–6.4% with a drop of specificity of 2–2.7%.
4
Discussion
This study illustrates advantages and disadvantages of using a LASSO model as a feature selection approach when seeking diagnostic classifiers, and identifies three novel diagnostic markers for NC. Although LASSO was able to identify features with a reasonable overall sensitivity and specificity in the training data set, use of the same features in a second independent dataset did not yield a good replication performance. LASSO chooses a sparse model and excludes any redundant features. In this way, it could end up including only the better of two similar features, whereof the excluded one potentially could be the best in the validation dataset. An alternative to LASSO could be elastic net, where the features are not excluded, but combined if they are similar. Whether the elastic net could be used to develop a more generally applicable model needs to be investigated in future studies. Also, the poor replication performance seen in this study might not simply be due to over-fitting in the training dataset, but also because of the different definitions of controls in the two datasets, the invertible differences in hardware equipment, hardware and software settings like sampling frequency, filters, etc. and scoring procedures across different clinics.
Analyzing the cause for the poor performance of the final LASSO model, we looked at each feature individually and found that for most feature values, the distributions were significantly different across the two PSG datasets. Lack of generalization of performance, when moving from one experimental condition/data set to another, is a common problem of machine learning algorithms, which are often sensitive to environmental changes, like use of hardware and scoring between technicians. It is noticed that features reflecting power in the high frequency band (21–35 Hz) were all found to be indicative for NC patients in the training dataset and were increased in NC patients in all stages. None of these features showed similar trend in the validation dataset, and it must be assumed that these features are due to different equipment/ hardware settings for the NC and control subjects in the training dataset rather than due to physiological disease markers.
In spite of these limitations, 3 of the 13 selected features appeared to have similar distributions and performances in both dataset. One of them, decreased percentage amount of sigma power (11–16 Hz) in wake has not been reported before. The other two abnormalities, increased percentage of alpha power (8–11 Hz) in REM sleep and decreased delta power (0.5–4 Hz) in N1 subtracted by W, are less surprising as similar to findings reported in animals.17 The increased alpha power in REM reflects that the NC patients are more “awake” or “conscious” during REM compared to control subjects. The decreased delta power in N1-W might reflect either a smaller delta power in N1 sleep in NC patients compared to controls and non-narcoleptics, a bigger delta power in wake in NC patients compared to controls and non-narcoleptics, or a combination of the two. Whatever the case might be, these likely all represent sleep stage dissociation in wake and/or N1 sleep. Overall, these features illustrate that wakefulness, N1 and REM sleep are more alike and mixed together in NC patients compared to controls as well as non-narcoleptics, a result that is not surprising if one considers that increased N1 sleep is a very consistent sleep architecture abnormality in narcolepsy.12–14,31 These results support former studies showing that the frequency distributions of all sleep EEG spectra differs in narcolepsy, including hypocretin knock-out mice compared to wild type mice17 as well as in NC patients versus controls.11,32,33
In both datasets, cut offs for the 3 reproducible features were selected to be >97% specific, and at these cut offs, sensitivity for the REM sleep abnormality was 9.6% and 5.3%, sensitivity for the wake abnormality was 2.9% and 10.5%, and sensitivity for the N1-W abnormality was 9.6% and 15.8%. The sensitivity measures are low (high specificity was selected as a required selection criteria), and it should be clearly stated that the features found in this study should not stand alone when classifying NC patients.
The study suffers from a number of limitations. First, the datasets used in this study were slightly different from those previously used in Anderlauer et al.,15 a study demonstrating that SOREMPs at night, defined as REM latency below 15 minutes, are highly specific (99%) but modestly sensitive (~45%) biomarkers of NC patients. The most notable difference was that the training sample (a clinical trial sample at baseline), and several patients in the validation sample were allowed treatment with antidepressants and stimulants, though patients taking sodium oxybate were excluded. In our analysis of treatment effects, we found that antidepressants had no effect on any of the features, but that stimulants increased the probability of a false positive when using the feature reflecting delta power in the differential PSD N1-W.
Another notable difference between the two datasets was the lack of age- and sex-matching of the two groups in the validation dataset. This was inherent to the design used here (clinical sample), but led to the fact that NC patients in the validation dataset were younger than other subjects, likely explaining some of the differences in performance of the features across the two datasets. Indeed, in our analysis of age and gender effects, we found that age increased the probability of expressing alpha power in REM sleep in controls and narcolepsy, and decreased the probability of expressing sigma power in wakefulness in controls and non-narcoleptics. These effects likely explain why sensitivity for alpha power in REM sleep was lower in the validation dataset when compared to the training dataset, and why the sensitivity of the wake abnormality was higher in the validation dataset when compared to the training dataset. The fact that older people have more alpha power during REM sleep and more sigma power during wakefulness may reflect increased nocturnal awakenings, a well-known sleep alteration associated with normal aging. In this direction, it may be that EEG surrounding brief arousals should have been excluded from the analysis, although this would not be practical in clinical practice. Specifically, arousals may have been confounders of increased alpha power in REM sleep in NC patients and older healthy subjects.
Males were less likely to express low sigma power in wake and thus had more sigma power during wakefulness. Further, males were less likely to express the feature reflecting low delta power in the differential PSD N1-W and thus had lower delta power in wakefulness, higher delta power in N1 or a combination of both. These results are surprising and are in contrast with a recent report suggesting that women have higher delta power in NREM sleep.34
A weakness of this study is the heterogeneity of the two datasets. These datasets differ in terms of number and ratio of cases/not-cases, clinical definition of controls, age and treatment. It is, however, also a strength of this study, as the reproducible features found here were found to replicate in the face of harsh conditions. Further, the validation dataset resembles what occurs in a clinical setting, suggesting that the final three features could add value when diagnosing NC patients in a real life situation. Another limitation is the relative low data sampling rates; however all relevant power-bands were included for analysis, this is unlikely to have had significant influence on the results.
Our ultimate goal is to assemble a set of PSG features that could be diagnostic of NC with sensitivity and specificity values similar to that of the PSG-MSLT. Added to nocturnal SOREMPs, the three new EEG features found in this study raised sensitivity slightly while maintaining a rather high specificity (Table 7). As other studies have shown that sleep macrostructure is also changed in NC patients with shortened REM sleep onset,12,35,36 including changes in sleep stage transitions,7,12 features that include sleep stage transition could be added to raise sensitivity further. Hypocretin deficient NC is associated with REM behavior disorder and Periodic Leg Movements during sleep10 as well as attenuated autonomic response.37 It is likely that including features describing these additional characteristics in the EMG, ECG, etc. would increase sensitivity as well.
5
Conclusions
In summary, we found that EEG spectral analysis during REM sleep, wake and N1-W contains features that are indicative of NC, likely reflecting sleep stage dissociations. These features are not sufficiently predictive by themselves for NC, but added to PSG SOREMPs and other PSG features, could lead to new diagnostic procedures for NC.
