INTRODUCTION
A 2012 survey published by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention found that autism spectrum disorder (ASD) affects 1 in 50 children between the ages of 6 and 17 years.1 This estimate is significantly higher than the 2007 estimate of 1 in 88.2 The prevalence seems to be increasing with time, whether as a result of broader diagnostic criteria, increased awareness of the disorder, or additional unknown factors.
In the most recent, fifth edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (DSM-5), ASD is characterized by deficits in social communication and social interaction, and by restricted, repetitive patterns of behavior, interests, or activities.3ASD is an umbrella term that includes low-functioning (IQ < 70) to high-functioning individuals (IQ > 70), and that ranges over the broad DSM-IV categories of autistic disorder, Asperger’s syndrome, and pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified.2,4 It is more prevalent in males than females; 1 in 54 boys and 1 in 252 girls were identified as having ASD in a 2008 study.2 Females with ASD typically present higher cognitive impairments—such as a lower reported IQs—than males with ASD. Males with ASD are reported to have more stereotypical mannerisms and restricted/repetitive behaviors than females.5
In most cases, the initial behavioral signs of ASD present as early as 12 to 24 months of age.6,7 The differences between ASD infants and normal infants in the first year of development, however, are not very apparent. Additionally, ASD is associated with a high comorbidity rate and also with diverse symptoms, making reliable clinical diagnoses possible only around the age of 2–3 years.4,7 Children with ASD often develop maladaptive behaviors such as irritability, hyperactivity, aggression, depression, and anxiety, which seem to worsen during puberty.8 Social symptoms such as withdrawal can worsen over time,8 and about 46% of adults with ASD have poor to very poor outcomes in terms of independence, social life, and employment.9
The etiology of ASD is not precisely known. Additionally, neurobiologic findings reported in ASD change with age. For example, head circumference, which has been noted to be smaller in ASD individuals at birth, grows rapidly to be larger than those in typically developing children around toddler age, and then normalizes to near normal by adulthood.4 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), a noninvasive investigational tool, can help describe the various ways in which the brain develops, identify aspects of brain development that deviate from the typical developmental trajectory, and capture features of structure, function, and metabolism in the brain. As a noninvasive tool, it is the only high-resolution, complete-brain-coverage technique suitable for use in children in the clinical research setting.
A more precise understanding of an individual’s condition can lead to a better-targeted and customized intervention plan to fulfill the individual’s treatment needs. Each individual’s brain functions involve many different sets of interconnected regions, or circuits. These circuits are made up of distributed gray matter (processing) regions interconnected by specific white matter tracts and pathways. For circuits to function properly, all aspects of the circuit need to be intact. Improper circuit function has numerous potential causes: improper “structure” of the processing units in the gray matter, improper connectivity of the distributed aspects of the circuit, improper inputs to the circuit, and so on.
In order to better understand the functioning of neural circuitry of ASD subjects, we focus our review on the newly amassed literature concerning brain connectivity. From that particular perspective, two types of connectivity have been studied in this population in depth. We refer to these dimensions structural connectivity, reflecting the brain’s neuron-to-neuron connections, and functional connectivity, reflecting the correlated neural activity of the disparate parts of a circuit. Structural connectivity at the neuron level is, to date, actually measured directly only postmortem, and is principally achieved with antero- or retrograde tracers in experimental animals.10,11 The advent of water-diffusion sensitivity in MRI (most commonly practiced as diffusion tensor imaging [DTI]) provides a macroscopic view of the ultrastructural organization of the tissue within the imaged voxel. Within the white matter of the brain, where axon trajectories are the principal cellular organizational construct, water diffusion tends to reflect the average magnitude of diffusion, or mean diffusivity (which is related to the presence of impediments to diffusion such as density of cellular components or fluidity of the intracellular medium), and the average orientation of the cellular components, as water tends to diffuse in parallel to, as opposed to against, the impediments within the cell. The degree of orientation specificity within a voxel is referred to as the anisotropy, ranging from low anisotropy in nondirectional tissue (such as in the cerebrospinal fluid) to high anisotropy in highly directionally oriented tissues (such as in the main trunk of a white matter fiber pathway or within muscle tissue). Fractional anisotropy, ranging from 0 to 1.0, is the most commonly expressed metric in use to quantify this orientation anisotropy in brain diffusion imaging.12 In oriented tissues, diffusion magnitude along the main direction of the tissue orientation is referred to as axial diffusivity, and diffusion perpendicular to this principle direction is referred to as radial diffusivity. While often used as a proxy for true structural connectivity, diffusion MRI is an approximation of this connectivity in that it reflects spatially averaged properties over the imaged voxel that is very large with respect to the axons themselves. In addition, as a spatial average of potentially many discrete directional components that may be present within a voxel, the average direction of the tissue in a voxel may not match any of the specific orientations that reside within. Higher-order techniques for diffusion acquisition and analysis—ones that can resolve multiple directional components within the imaged voxel—are becoming available for use but have yet to become practical for widespread application in studies on autism.
A brain circuit and its components can also be identified by their common pattern of neuronal firing. Functional MRI (fMRI), while not designed to observe neuronal firing per se, is able to detect the changes in hemodynamics necessary to support neural activity. Bulk changes in cerebral hemodynamics associated with changes in neural activity associated with specific tasks can be localized by using well-designed behavioral tasks that tease apart the component functions associated with the specific tasks (task-based fMRI). More recently, it has been observed that, even in the absence of a specific task, the brain “at rest” exhibits a rich set of networks of correlated and anti-correlated fMRI signals. These distributed resting-state (RS) fMRI correlations mimic many of the same circuits that respond to specific tasks and, as nodes of a circuit, imply an “effective” connectivity (which may, or may not, reflect a direct anatomic structural connectivity).
Various other reviews on particular aspects of MRI and ASD have been published.13,14 Unfortunately, reports from imaging studies have been inconsistent. It has been suggested that both variations in MRI data collection and differences in methodologies for data processing and analysis could be responsible for the vastly varying results in the literature.15,16 For example, a survey of functional connectivity studies in ASD by Muller and colleagues16 suggested that the inconsistent findings may partially result from different methodological approaches—such as the type of filtering of time courses (low pass or band pass; frequency range of filtering), statistical removal of task-related activation, and choice of whole-brain analysis versus analysis of regions of interest (ROIs) chosen a priori. Another explanation for the inconsistencies is the inherent heterogeneity of ASD itself, which is further complicated by comorbidities. In this article, we reviewed studies that report connectivity changes in ASD either in the form of RS blood-oxygenation-level dependent (BOLD) network or as DTI parameters.
The overall purpose of this review is to identify consistencies in the DTI and RS connectivity literature in relation to subjects with ASD. From this emerging consensus we then seek to draw conclusions about biological significance and functional/behavioral implications of these changes in connectivity in order to help us understand the pathophysiology of the disorder.
METHODS
PubMed was used to identify peer-reviewed publications within the last ten years that explored DTI or RS connectivity in autism using MRI. The search terms used were the following: autism AND DTI AND MRI; autism AND connectivity AND MRI; autism AND resting state AND MRI; and autism AND default mode AND MRI. The cutoff date for latest publication was 15 January 2014. PubMed produced 57, 199, 49, and 26 results for each of the searches, respectively. These lists of publications were narrowed down to research studies, eliminating any review articles. Studies of autism with other severe comorbidities or with other disorders exhibiting autism-like symptomologies were also eliminated, as were single case studies and ones that used default mode network only as an anatomic reference term. Since studies of task-based connectivity vary significantly in the tasks used, each focuses on only a specific aspect of ASD connectivity; they are not of general application in this context. By contrast, much research has already been done on RS connectivity, and a basic understanding of the default mode network has been established. For that reason, only studies that focused on RS, rather than task-based, connectivity, have been included here. The final list includes 33 RS connectivity studies and 36 DTI studies.
All studies were read and tabulated for population characteristics, such as number of subjects in the autism and control groups, IQs, and age ranges of each group. Each was also tabulated for methodological details such as imaging methods used for DTI or RS acquisitions, details of the MRI system used, and software methods used to analyze DTI or RS data. For the DTI studies, results were tabulated to include any change of the white matter properties of fractional anisotropy, mean diffusivity, radial diffusivity, or axial diffusivity as well as the white matter brain regions where these changes were reported as occurring. For the RS studies, results were tabulated for seed-based analyses to include seed and target anatomic regions and the direction of the functional connectivity change observed between patient and control populations.
From these primary tabulations of the literature, we sought to express the observed major findings in a more directly comparable manner. The resulting RS connectivity literature was summarized by tabulating inter-regional increases or decreases in observed connectivity in a common neuroanatomic framework.17 This summary can be visualized as a connectivity matrix where we can indicate concordance or discordance in the literature of RS connectivity changes in ASD.
Similarly, the DTI literature was also narrowed down into tabular format indicating changes in fractional anisotropy, mean diffusivity, radial diffusivity, and axial diffusivity as a function of standardized brain regions.18 These results were further broken down into association fiber components, corpus callosum components and projection fiber components for fractional anisotropy and mean diffusivity.
Articles that had explored correlations between changes in RS parameters or DTI parameters and any of the behavioral measures or age were tabulated separately.
RESULTS
RS fMRIOur literature search for RS fMRI in autism generated 33 studies (Supplemental Table A). Nineteen of those studies reported between-diagnostic-group comparisons in RS connectivity/correlation patterns using seed-based analysis; seven used an approach involving either principle component analysis or independent component analysis; one used both independent component analysis and anatomic ROI-based analysis; three used regional homogeneity analysis; and three looked at the efficiency of the voxel-wise network. The study populations varied widely, with the ages ranging from very young children between the ages of 12 and 46 months19 to adults up to 40 years of age.20 Autism severity also varied from high-functioning ASD, Asperger’s disorder, autism with and without language deficiency, pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified, and ASD with and without the MET receptor tyrosine kinase gene (MET) allele. Though some studies limited their study populations to males, 24 studies also included females.Methodologically, most of the studies (27 out of 33) used a 3-Tesla (3T) scanner, and 4 used a 1.5T scanner. Two studies were based on the multisite Autism Brain Image Data Exchange (ABIDE; http://fcon_1000.projects.nitrc.org/indi/abide/) data set, in which the magnet strengths varied. General Electric and Siemens were the scanner manufacturers, with an almost equal number of studies using one or the other. For these RS studies, the repetition time and echo time values varied between 1 and 3 seconds and between 25 and 45 milliseconds, respectively. About half of the scans (15 studies) were performed while the subjects were keeping their eyes open and staring at a fixation marker, and 2 were performed on between-task fixation blocks.21,22 Five studies instructed their participants to keep their eyes closed; 1 instructed them to relax and stay awake but without any particular direction concerning the eyes; and 1 was performed while the participants were in their natural sleep cycles. The 2 ABIDE studies contained data with mixed subject instructions. Six studies failed to mention their instructions in the published article. One study had subjects participate in both conditions (open vs. closed eyes) and did not report any effect on the results.23 However, a number of studies have looked explicitly at this effect.24–28 While the effect size of the eyes-condition (open versus closed versus fixation) is only modest, it has been shown to have a detectable, anatomically variable effect. Thus, it is important to have the eyes-condition information reported distinctly and clearly in order to control for this (and other) known sources of variance in future meta-analyses of pooled study results. The analysis packages in these studies varied widely, and included the following: Analysis of Functional NeuroImages (AFNI), Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the Brain groups Software Library (FSL), Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM), Brain Voyager, Group ICA of fMRI Toolbox (GIFT), and home-grown software.For studies using principle component/independent component analyses, a direct comparison between studies is not attempted in this review due to variability in component matching across these data sets. Similar to a review by Muller and colleagues,16 26 of the 33 the studies report some amount of either reduction or loss of local or long-distance connectivity in subjects on the autism spectrum compared to control subjects without autism, as can be seen in Table 1.Also, as described previously, the current publications utilize a broad variety of acquisition and analysis techniques, and vary widely in terms of the specific neuroanatomic localization techniques used to report summary results.. Since the anatomic bases for the description of altered RS functional connectivity is so variable, assessment of the concordance (or lack thereof) of the descriptions as provided in the original publications is extremely limited. Supplemental Table B highlights the paucity of corroborated observations.Most studies dealt with long-distance connectivity. Among the regions studied, prefrontal cortex (PFC) was most often reported (in ten studies) to have reduced connectivity to other regions.20,22,29,33,39,40,47,49,50,55 Posterior cingulate cortex (PCC) was reported in eight studies to have reduced,21,29–31,40,41,47,50 and in three reports to have increased, long-range connectivity to other ROIs.30,41,43 The precuneus,29,33,41,43,47,50 anterior cingulate cortex (ACC),21,22,33,43,50 superior temporal gyrus,34,39,43,50,54 posterior superior temporal sulcus,20,49,53 anterior insula,20,37,49 and parietal lobule35,50,53,55 each had four to five reports of reduced, with either one or two reports of increased, long-range connectivities. Verly and colleagues54 reported a widespread reduction in inter-hemispheric connectivity among the ROIs studied, with the exception of the arcuate fasciculus part of the superior longitudinal fasciculus). In their research-based study, the DiMartino group, reported an increased degree of centrality (i.e., number of direct connections) for posterior parahippocampal gyrus and amygdala, and decreased degree of centrality for precuneus,23 and in their article based on the ABIDE data set, the same group reported a decreased degree of centrality and regional homogeneity for striatum48 (Supplemental Table B).Among the groups that studied local/regional connectivity, Starck and colleagues47 reported a lack of difference between study groups in local connectivity for any of the brain regions studied. Among other reports, PFC and inferior and superior frontal gyrus each had one report of increased, and one report of decreased, local connectivity. PCC, superior temporal sulcus, and precuneous had only one report of decreased local connectivity or regional coherence. The inferior temporal gyrus,56 temporal pole,56 posterior insular cortex,48 thalamus,32 and supramarginal gyrus46 had one report of increase in either of local connectivity, regional coherence, or regional homogeneity. The medial cingulate cortex had two reports of decreased local connectivity46,56 and one report of increased regional coherence. The medial frontal gyrus had one report of decreased regional coherence32 and two reports of increased local connectivity.46,56 The medial temporal gyrus had two reports of increased local connectivity46,56 and one report of increased regional coherence.32 And finally, the posterior parahippocampal gyrus had only two reports of increased local connectivity.46,56 See Supplemental Table B.
DTIDTI studies were primarily performed on a 3T scanner (26/36), with 8 studies using a 1.5T scanner (Supplemental Table C). Two studies did not specify the strength of the magnet. Though General Electric and Siemens were the primary manufacturers, eight studies used Phillips scanners. The imaging parameters varied widely. The repetition time values varied from 4.1 to 21 seconds, and echo time values from 67 to 107 ms. The diffusion gradients b-value varied from 700 to 2000 s/mm2, and the number of diffusion encoding directions ranged from 6 to 64. Similar to RS studies, the DTI studies also varied widely in their study populations, with ages ranging from 257 to 54 years.58,59 Autism severity in the ASD groups varied from high-functioning autism, to Asperger’s only, to combined groups of Asperger’s syndrome, autism, and pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified. The gender ratio also varied widely, from all-male groups to mixed-gender groups. The data-processing tools utilized included the following: FMRIB’s Diffusion Toolbox, DTI Studio, DTI task card software, B-spline fitting, Tract-Based Spatial Statistics (with whole-brain voxel-wise analysis and with tactography), BioImage Suite, SPM5 Diffusion Toolbox, tensor-based fast-marching method, Explore DTI, and home-grown software.Thirty out of the 36 DTI studies reviewed examined fractional anisotropy differences, and 20 studies examined mean diffusivity differences, between the study groups. Four publications reported their results in terms of network statistics (i.e. clustering coefficients) and tractographic parameters (i.e. number of fibers) leaving 32 studies that can be directly compared (Table 2).Most studies reported a lower fractional anisotropy and higher mean diffusivity in the ASD groups compared to the typically developing group. Exceptions include reports by the Ameis,74 Billeci,76 Nagae,75 Nair,55 Sivaswamy,63 and Verly54 groups. The Billeci group76 has reported increased fractional anisotropy and mean diffusivity in multiple regions, including the corpus callosum, whereas the Sivaswamy group63 has reported increased fractional anisotropy and mean diffusivity in the cerebellar peduncle area. Five of the 30 fractional anisotropy studies found no effect of group in fractional anisotropy,65,85–87 (74, 75, 54, 55, 84) whereas one reported a hemispheric effect in the superior longitudinal fasciculus.75 Another study looking at the effect of a particular allele of the MET gene—a gene variant thought to be a risk factor for more severe social and communication phenotypes in individuals with ASD—reported a significant effect of the gene allele on fractional anisotropy, irrespective of the diagnostic group.40Most commonly reported areas for decreased fractional anisotropy were the association fibers (the most common being the superior longitudinal fasciculus, occipitofrontal fasciculus, uncinate fasciculus, inferior longitudinal fasciculus, and cingulum) and corpus callosum, as reported by 8 to 12 studies each. The internal capsule was also reported by 7 studies to have reduced fractional anisotropy in ASD. The superior longitudinal fasciculus, corpus callosum, and corticospinal track had the highest number of mentions among the reports of increased mean diffusivity in ASD (see Supplemental Tables D and E).It is important to note that the Beacher group77 found lower fractional anisotropy only in their Asperger’s male participants compared to typically developing male. No similar difference was found in their female participants. Also, the Beacher group was the only group that reported lower mean diffusivity in the thalamus in the Asperger’s group (no gender effect) compared to the typically developing group.
Combined StudiesFour studies performed both DTI and RS fMRI experiments.40,50,54,55 Rudie and colleagues40 found that the presence of the MET risk allele resulted in reduced connectivity from the PCC to medial PFC and reduced fractional anisotropy in the splenium of the corpus callosum (the fiber pathway originating from PCC/precuneus), irrespective of the study group. The presence of the MET risk allele in the ASD group, however, resulted in more severely compromised brain circuitry and greater impairment in social behaviors. Hence, it might be important to further separate the ASD subjects with respect to such risk factors, and to compare them to typically developing subjects without such gene alterations, in order to increase our understanding of the brain alterations in ASD.The Verly group54 focused on the language network (superior longitudinal fasciculus) in adolescents and found no difference between groups in their DTI study, but did report a significant leftward asymmetry in fractional anisotropy and apparent diffusion coefficient. The presence or absence of bilateral arcuate fasciculus had a significant effect on performance on a language test and on intra-hemispheric functional connectivity between cortical language centers (the inferior frontal gyrus and the superior temporal gyrus) in the ASD group. These effects were not observed in the control group, though in 29% of that group, only the left unilateral arcuate fasciculus was present. It is important to note that both ASD groups—those with and without bilateral arcuate fasciculus—had significantly lower verbal IQ and exhibited social behavior impairment.The Mueller group50 compared adults with high-functioning autism to healthy adult controls. For the high-functioning group it reported decreased fractional anisotropy values in the right temporo-parietal junction and decreased functional connectivity between right hemisphere clusters, including the cluster including the precentral gyrus and PCC, and the cluster including the precentral gyrus, postcentral gyrus, PCC, precuneus, and superior parietal lobule—the two clusters being a part of the dorsal attention network. The group reported decreased fractional anisotropy in the left frontal lobe and loss of functional connectivity between the left hemisphere medial PFC and ACC (part of left fronto-parietal network) in the high-functioning group compared to the healthy controls. The group also reported a trend toward decreased gray matter volume in the temporal lobe accompanied by decreased functional connectivity of the dorsal motor nucleus. Thus, the high-functioning group exhibited deficits in the higher-order association cortex (regarding both functional and structural connectivity), while exhibiting no differences in the primary sensory and motor cortices. According to the Mueller group,50 these findings imply a probable impairment of higher-order multisensory integration in the adults with high-functioning autism.The Nair group55 worked with adolescents with high-functioning autism. They reported several clusters of underconnectivity in their RS analysis in the ASD group, and hyperconnectivity between temporal seed and the right thalamus. In the DTI study, the group reported significantly increased mean diffusivity for bilateral tracts connecting the thalamus to the motor and somatosensory cortices, and for the connection between the right hemisphere of the thalamus and the PFC. They also reported increased radial diffusivity in the thalamic tracts for the bilateral motor cortex, left hemisphere somatosensory cortex, and right hemisphere PFC.
Behavioral FindingsOnly seven (~21%) of the RS studies and ten (~28%) of the DTI studies looked at correlations between observed imaging parameters and specific behavioral measures in ASD (see Supplemental Table F).These studies vary widely regarding the behaviors reported and whether RS activity or diffusion properties are correlated with those behaviors. When resting state correlations are observed between two regions that share connectivity with a major white matter fiber bundle (such as precuneus and superior frontal gyrus sharing the cingulum bundle as its principle white matter pathway), it is possible that the behavioral performance can be associated with that major fiber bundle. Overall, for the RS – behavioral correlations, of note is the preponderance of cortical-region pairs associated with the cingulum bundle.
Autism severityFour RS studies found a correlation between reduced connectivity and ASD severity, irrespective of the measures used (Social Responsiveness Scale, Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule (ADOS), Autism Spectrum Quotient), with the medial PFC being implicated in all, and the ACC, precuneus, and temporal and parietal lobes implicated in some.20,33,39,44Among the DTI studies, four reported negative correlations between autism severity and fractional anisotropy;55,61,64,69 the brain regions involved were the left superior longitudinal fasciculus,64 right anterior thalamic radiation and right uncinate fasciculus,69 and fronto-thalamic and temporo-thalamic tracts (anterior and posterior limbs of internal capsule, respectively).55 One study reported no correlation between autism severity and fractional anisotropy.70 Additionally, one study reported that the number of fibers numbers in the genu of the corpus callosum was negatively correlated with the Childhood Autism Rating Score.85
Social impairmentSix studies have reported negative correlations between RS connectivity and social impairment in ASD subjects (reported as negative correlations with the Autism Diagnostic Interview–Reciprocal Social Interaction score or ADOS–Social Scale score).19,22,30,31,33,55 The connections involved in four of these studies were between the following: PCC and temporal lobe, posterior parahippocampal gyrus, and superior frontal gyrus;31 PCC and right superior frontal gyrus;30 PCC and right medial temporal gyrus;22 and right hemisphere motor cortex and thalamus.55 The other two studies reported negative correlations between ADOS–Social Scale scores and the synchronization between left and right hemisphere inferior frontal gyri,19 and between ADOS–Social Scale scores and the total precuneus connectivity z-scores.33 Kewon and colleagues56 reported a negative correlation between average local degrees of connectivity, the number of other regions to which the ROI connected, and social impairment (reported as a negative correlation with ADOS–Social Scale scores). The one outlier was a study by the Alaerts group,53 which reported a positive correlation between RS connectivity involving posterior superior temporal sulcus seed and performance on the emotion-recognition task. The regions involved were the supplementary motor area, supramarginal gyrus, inferior frontal gyrus, and precentral gyrus.Among the DTI studies, only two reported correlations between fractional anisotropy and either the Social Interaction subscale of the Gilliam Autism Rating Scale or the ADOS Social Scale score.55,61 One of these studies—by the Nair group55—reported the negative correlation as specifically involving fractional anisotropy in the frontothalamic and temporothalamic tracts. The Sundaram group61 did not report any specific brain region, and their results were not significant after Bonferroni correction.
Severity of restricted and repetitive behaviorsThree out of the seven RS studies reporting correlations with repetitive and restricted behavior describe a negative correlation between connectivity scores and the severity of that behavior {22, 31,33}. PCC connectivity, predominantly with the medial PFC, is reported in one study to have this negative correlation.31 ACC seed connectivity also demonstrates a negative correlation with the severity of this behavior.22,33 Other studies, however, indicate increasing severity with increasing connectivity strength between the PCC and right posterior parahippocampal gyrus30, between voxels within the salience network (ACC, superior frontal gyrus, thalamus, and bilateral insular cortex),43 and between the right temporal lobe and thalamus,55 as well as with the density of cerebral cortex local connectivity and average local degrees of connectivity.56One study using DTI to investigate the correlation with repetitive/restricted behavior in ASD, found a negative correlation between the white matter connectivity (as measured by number of streamlines and voxels) in the forceps minor of the corpus callosum and the severity of that behavior.87
Language and communication skillsNine RS studies and five DTI studies have reported correlations between measured parameters and communication capabilities (Supplemental Table F). In an RS study by Weng and colleagues,31 verbal and nonverbal communication skills decline with increased connectivity between the PCC and temporal lobe and also between the PCC right posterior parahippocampal gyrus. Likewise, in the same study, nonverbal communication skills were negatively correlated PCC–superior frontal gyrus connectivity.But most RS studies reached contrary results. Dinstein and colleagues19 reported lower ADOS communication scores and increased expressive language ability (measured by the Mullen scale for early learning) with increasing inter-hemispheric correlations bilaterally in the inferior frontal gyrus. Similarly ADOS communication scores were reported to be negatively correlated with anterior medial PFC to right lateral parietal connectivity by Redcay and colleagues44 and with right motor cortex to thalamus connectivity by Nair and colleagues.55 Verly and colleagues54 also reported a positive correlation between verbal skills and superior temporal gyrus–inferior frontal gyrus connectivity. A study by Assaf and colleagues33 also points toward lower ADOS communication scores with increasing precuneus connectivity z-scores, and Maximo and colleagues46 reported the ADI-R communicative score to be positively correlated with local connectivity within multiple cortical regions.Among the DTI studies, a study by the Nagae group75 reported a negative correlation between mean diffusivity in the left superior longitudinal fasciculus and Clinical Evaluation for Language Fundamentals–4 scores, whereas a study by the Billeci group76 found a similar negative correlation between left arcuate fasciculus mean diffusivity and expressive language ability only in the typically developing group. A study by the Li group86 did not report the anisotropy or diffusivity findings, but instead performed network analysis on the DTI data and found that as short-range connectivities increased in typically developing subjects, group Gray Oral Reading Test–4 scores go down, whereas in the ASD group, they improved. Hence, they suggested that the increase in short-range connectivity observed in the ASD group compared to the typically developing group might be a compensatory mechanism, which might be leading to the language/communication disabilities observed in ASD. One study reported a lack of correlation between the language scores and any of the DTI parameters.59 A study by Joseph and colleagues,83 which looked only at hemispheric asymmetry, reported that rightward asymmetry quotient of pars opercularis, a part of the inferior frontal gyrus important in speech and language production, was positively correlated with language scores.
Other behaviorsLagen and colleagues78 reported a positive correlation between inhibitory control in the autistic group as measured by the go/no-go task and fractional anisotropy in insular cortex.
DISCUSSION
Connectivity, represented either as axonal inter-nuron connectivity of the white matter or as the effective coordinated temporal activity of distributed nodes of a complex circuit, has become an area of increasing importance in the ongoing research into the etiology of ASDs. As altered circuit functions become elucidated, it is important to resolve the relative contribution of structural connectivity as a causative factor for these changes versus numerous other factors that can also alter these functions.
Resting State ConnectivityThe majority of the reviewed RS functional connectivity studies report a loss or reduction in cortico-cortical functional connectivity in individuals with autism compared to the normative control population. Most reports for hypo-connectivity involved the PFC (ten independent reports). Previous structural imaging studies have reported enlarged gray and white matter in young children with ASD compared to their normative counterparts, with most of the overgrowth being noted in the frontal lobes, particular dorsal and medial prefrontal cortex.14,54 The overgrowth observed in childhood, however, seems to slow down by the pre-teenage years, and by adulthood, the brain volumes of individuals with ASD are comparable to those of normative adults.14 It is well known that the human brain goes through extensive pruning from childhood to adulthood. Hence, it is suggested that the brains of children with ASD must go through more pruning than those of typical children in order to reach similar volumes by adolescence. It is suggested, in turn, that this greater amount of pruning accounts for the differences in the structural brain networks of individuals with ASD.54 Hence, it is understandable that the most potential abnormal pruning would occur in the locations with the most original overgrowth, the medial prefrontal cortex. It is plausible that excessive pruning would lead to resultant fiber systems that are of lower packing density than typically expected, and would result in reduced fractional anisotropy and increased mean diffusivity.Mounting evidence in the RS literature suggests that other regions also have reduced long-range connectivity—such as the PCC, ACC, superior temporal gyrus, insula, and precuneus (in the reverse order of number of reports per ROI). Given that the ACC and PCC support major connections to the cingulum bundle (and to the adjacent corpus callosum) and have projections into the PFC, superior temporal gyrus, and insula, one can see how these decreases can be interdependent.It has been suggested that increased local connectivity and regional coherence in some brain regions observed in ASD is possibly a result of overcompensation for the reduced long-range connectivity. The studies reviewed here, however, do not consistently report heightened regional connectivity.In terms of interpreting the presented results, only 17 of the 33 RS studies looked at any correlation of the changes identified with one or more behavioral measures of ASD. Five studies looked at correlations with overall autism score; nine studies looked at correlations with social impairment and with language and communication skills; and seven studies looked at correlations with repetitive/restrictive behavior. Nevertheless, many of the commonly reported regions with reduced functional connectivity are known to be involved in the relevant behavioral capacities. The degree to which these altered connectivities are predictive and specific for the altered behaviors is unknown.
Diffusion ConnectivityThe DTI studies have more consistent results than the RS studies, and point toward an overall reduction of fractional anisotropy and increase of mean diffusivity in many white matter areas. The most reported ROIs were the corpus callosum, superior longitudinal fasciculus, and occipitofrontal fasciculus, with decreased fractional anisotropy (12, 11, and 10 reports, respectively) and increased mean diffusivity (7, 9, and 4 reports, respectively). The cingulum and internal capsule were not far behind in the number of reports. When it came to interpreting these results, though 14 of the 36 studies attempted to correlate the observed DTI changes with ASD behavioral markers, the DTI measures studied varied from fractional anisotropy, mean diffusivity, radial diffusivity, and axial diffusivity, to number of fibers,85 number of lines depicting fibers in a tract and voxels,87 local connectivity within ROIs,86 and hemispheric asymmetry quotient of the ROIs.83 Additionally, the behavioral measures themselves varied from autism severity, to restricted/repetitive behaviors, to communication impairments, with only a limited number of studies per behavior. For example, only two studies reported correlations with social impairment,55,61 and only one study reported any correlation with severity of restricted/repetitive behaviors.87 Even though five studies looked at correlations with language/communication skills, one of these studies looked only at the correlation with local connectivity within different ROIs,86 another at the correlation with the length of streamlines within the superior longitudinal fasciculus,76 and yet another at the correlation with the hemispheric asymmetry quotient.83 Again, while it is possible that structural connectivity changes are predictive and specific for the behavioral profiles in these subjects, the literature has yet to reach a consensus on these matters.
Combined StudiesThe studies that begin to integrate analyses of RS and diffusion connectivity hold promise to better elucidate the causes of altered brain functioning in young individuals with ASD. Though the number of published studies currently remains small,40,50,54,55 each adds a new dimension to understanding the complexities of structural-functional connections in this population. For example, specific behaviors and specific pathways, combined with genetic variations, are all so intertwined that they are nearly impossible to differentiate through studies that look as these factors separately.The addition of behavioral correlates to the structural or functional connectivity studies would be immensely valuable but exceedingly complex. Because of all the potential confounds and covariates, the numbers of subjects necessary to extract meaningful, specific, and significant behavioral correlations would be large. Different diagnostic groups also overlap to some degree on most behavioral measures. Despite our search for autism-specific findings, such clarity may be precluded by the blurred diagnostic lines. Finally, behavioral measures may or may not be distributed in a continuum between typically developing subjects and their autistic subject counterparts—without which continuum, the behavioral measures would fail to yield to s simple correlation analysis, but rather require a more complex analysis of the interaction between diagnosis and connectivity measure. Although addressing these multidimensional problems is critical to understanding autism, the challenge adds complexity to study design and requires a substantial numbers of subjects to achieve statistical power.
SynthesisDespite the many studies that point toward decreased RS connectivity in ASD, the field is still at an early stage regarding the reproducibility and replication of specific findings. To date, the replication across various studies requires a liberal interpretation of similarity or equivalence. RS studies have been documented as having good poolability despite minor variations in acquisition protocols.89 While analysis methods are variable, the major barrier to integrating these findings is the heterogeneity of anatomic localization systems employed and the subsequent lack of reporting of observations from similar pairs of seed and target regions. Variability in positioning and size of seed regions inescapably introduces substantial variation in the resultant pattern of connectivity. It is interesting to see the emergence of dynamically defined networks taking the place of anatomic localization. When one reports the connectivity of the posterior cingulate cortex as that of “most of the default mode network nodes,” the pattern of connectivity remains uncertain; the default mode network remains a variable concept in the literature because it is defined functionally rather than anatomically. While the reader can make assumptions as to what this pattern of connectivity via the default node network might look like (as we have in our summary), there is ambiguity in regions reported in this manner that reduces both clarity and precision.Another shortfall in the current literature is that the changes in connectivity patterns have yet to be clearly correlated with behavioral findings. Such correlated studies are critical in order to understand how findings of decreased functional connectivity are useful in understanding the particular behavioral manifestations of ASD. Because these manifestations fall along a spectrum, variations in subject sampling will dramatically affect the findings and the patterns identified; variations among individuals in the same sample may actually undercut the capacity to identify distinct patterns.Notwithstanding the above, the preponderance of decreased diffusion connectivity in long-range association fiber systems is consistent with decreased RS connectivity in the networks subserved by those pathways. Furthermore, for the most part, the greater the reduction in efficiency of a network, as observed either by reduced diffusion or RS connectivity, the greater the behavioral deficits that are seen. These general trends all seem to point to a consistent pattern. Whereas inter- and intra-hemispheric cortico-cortical connectivity has been found to be decreased in ASD, cortico-subcortical (thalamic and striatal) connectivity has been reported to be increased (as in the study by DiMartino and colleagues48). Deep white matter pathways may have been relatively spared in the initial white matter structural overgrowth,90 with the consequence that they may not have been subjected to the same overpruning that is potentially affecting cortico-cortical connections, particularly of the prefrontal cortex. This process may result in the relative upregulation of this subcortical connectivity, thereby serving a compensatory role.34
Autism Neuroimaging and “Big Data”Given the existing variation in methodological approaches to data analysis in the ASD literature, it is reasonable to assume that the differences among studies may need to be resolved through some sort of combined analysis. Pooling data has benefits in both increasing the number of subjects in an experiment and decreasing methodological variability applied to those subjects. One way to promote additional common analysis is through the promotion of data sharing. A number of general resources for data sharing such as Neuroimaging Informatics Tools and Resources Clearinghouse (http://www.nitrc.org/)91 and XNAT Central (http://central.xnat.org) exist. In addition, numerous child-specific data-sharing/data-access sites such as the Child and Adolescent Neurodevelopment Initiative (CANDIShare),92 National Institutes of Health Pediatric Database,93 and Pediatric Imaging, Neurocognition and Genetics94 are available. Specific to the autism research community, both grass-roots (such as ABIDE) and federally sponsored facilities (such as the National Database for Autism Research) are becoming commonplace.Numerous studies in this review have used data that were later contributed to the ABIDE collection,49,50 and three of the studies utilized the combined data of the ABIDE collection.45,48,53 The studies that utilize ABIDE data stand out for their large number of patients (278–447 autism subjects) compared to the other studies (7–57 autism subjects). Nielsen and colleagues45 used the data for classification purposes and had modest success in using the combined RS data to distinguish between controls and patients. As in the individual studies, regions with altered connectivity are implicated in the default mode network, parahippocampal and fusiform gyri, insula, Wernike’s area, and intraparietal sulcus.45 Di Martino and colleagues,48 with their seed-based analysis of the ABIDE data set, have indicated both a massive predominance of hypo-connectivity within many of the cortico-cortical pairs of regions and a hyper-connectivity of the subcortical regions. In a study by Alaerts and colleagues,53 a seed-based analysis in the posterior superior temporal sulcus confirmed their observation of underconnectivity with the inferior parietal lobule. In summary, while some of the findings of the smaller individual studies have been confirmed through studies based on the combined ABIDE collection, work is ongoing to disentangle the site-specific sources of variance that may be discovered as the data are pooled.
CONCLUSION
The general finding in the literature reviewed here is that decreases in diffusion and resting state connectivity are present in ASDs. While the literature is still largely characterized by methodological variability and studies with relatively small numbers of subjects, some common interpretational themes are emerging, and larger studies with pooled data and more homogeneous analytic approaches are now being conducted. Given the general findings for connectivity in autism, the next challenge is to generate more precise results and to determine whether those results can be correlated with the diverse symptomatologies and behavioral profiles of patients with autism.
Supplementary Material
Supp Table DTable D: Diffusion fractional anisotropy (FA) findings. Table E: Diffusion mean diffusivity (MD) findingsCC, Corpus callosum; IC, Internal capsule; L, Left hemisphere portion of the brain region; MET, Met receptor tyrosine kinase; OFF, Occipito-frontal fasciculus; R, Right hemisphere portion of the brain region; SLF, Superior longitudinal fasciculus; ↓: Decreased FA in ASD group↑: Increased FA in ASD group
Supp Table ETable E: Diffusion mean diffusivity (MD) findingsCC, corpus callosum; IC, internal capsule; L, left hemisphere portion of the brain region; OFF, occipito-frontal fasciculus; R, right hemisphere portion of the brain region
Supp Table FTable F: Summary of behavioral observationsADI, autism diagnostic interview; ADI-R, autism diagnostic interview, revised; ADOS, Autism Diagnostic Observation Schedule; AQ, autism severity quotient; ASD, autism spectrum disorders; AxD, axial diffusivity; CARS, Childhood Autism Rating Scale; CELF, clinical evaluation for language fundamentals; DTI, diffusion tensor imaging; FA, fractional anisotropy; GARS, Gilliam Autism Rating Scale; GORT, Gray Oral Reading Test; L, left hemisphere portion of the brain region; MD, mean diffusivity; NC, no change; R, right hemisphere portion of the brain region; RaD, radial diffusivity; RS, resting state; SRS, social responsiveness scale; TD, typically developing.
Supp Table aTable A: Resting state fMRI literature reviewed3T, 3 Tesla; ABIDE, autism brain data exchange; ADHD, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder; AFNI, analysis of functional neuroimages software; ANATICOR, regression analysis to remove local artifacts in EPI data using anatomy- based regressors; ASD, autism spectrum disorders; AUT, autistic disorder; BA, Brodmann area; BET, brain extraction tool; BOLD, blood oxygen-level dependent; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; DMN, default mode network; EPI, echo planar imaging; fALFF, fractional Amplitude of Low Frequency Fluctuations; FAST, FMRIB's automated segmentation tool; FEAT, FMRIB's expert analysis tool; FIQ, full-scale IQ; fMRI, functional MRI; FOV, field of view; FSL, FMRIB software library; FWHM, full width at half maximum; GE, General Electric; GIFT, group ICA functional toolbox software; GRE, gradient recalled echo; GR-EPI. Gradient recalled echo planar imaging; HC, healthy control; HF, high functioning; ICA, independent competent analysis; IPL, inferior parietal lobule; IQ, Intelligence quotient; kHz, kilohertz; MELODIC, multivariate exploratory linear optimized decomposition into independent components tool; MET, Met receptor tyrosine kinase gene; mm, millimeter; MNI, Montreal Neurological Institute; MPFC, medial prefrontal cortex; MR, magnetic resonance; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; ms, millisecond; NOS-PD, personality disorder - not otherwise specified; PCC, posterior cingulate cortex; PDD-NOS, pervasive developmental disorder – not otherwise specified; PIQ, performance IQ; PrC, precuneous cortex; ReHo, regional homogeneity; RETROICOR, retrospective correction of physiological motion effects in fMRI; ROI, region of interest; RS, resting state; s, second; SD, standard deviation; SPM, statistical parametric mapping; T2, transverse relaxation time; TD, typically developing; TE, echo time; TR, repetition time; VIQ, verbal IQ; VMHC, voxel-mirrored homotopic connectivity; WM, white matter.
Supp Table bTable B: Reviewed publications methodological details3T, 3 Tesla; AC-PC, anterior commissure – posterior commissure; ACC, anterior cingulate cortex; ADC, apparent diffusion coefficient; AIR, automatic image registration software; ArF, arcuate fasciculus; ASD, autism spectrum disorders; ASP, Asperger syndrome; AxD, axial diffusion; CC, corpus callosum; CELF, clinical evaluation for language fundamentals; COV, covarying; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; CST, cortical spinal tract; DTI, diffusion tensor imaging; DQ, developmental quotient; DWI, diffusion weighted image; EPI, echo planar imaging; FA, fractional anisotropy; FDT, FMRIB’s diffusion toolkit; FIQ, full-scale IQ; FNIRT, FMRIB’s nonlinear image registration tool; FSL, FMRIB software library; FOV, field of view; GE, General Electric; GRAPPA, generalized autocalibrating partially parallel acquisition; HF, high functioning; ICBM, international consortium for brain mapping; IF-OF, inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus; ILF, inferior longitudinal fasciculus; IQ, Intelligence quotient; MD, mean diffusivity; MET, Met receptor tyrosine kinase gene; mm, millimeter; MNI, Montreal Neurological Institute; ms, millisecond; MR, magnetic resonance; NEX, number of excitations; NVIQ, nonverbal intelligence quotient; PDD-NOS, pervasive developmental disorder – not otherwise specified; PFC, prefrontal cortex; PIQ, performance intelligence quotient; RaD, radial diffusion; RD, radial diffusivity; ROI, region of interest; SENSE, sensitivity encoding; SLF, superior longitudinal fasciculus; SNR, signal to noise ratio; SPGR, spoiled gradient recalled acquisition in steady state; SPM, statistical parametric mapping; STG. Superior temporal gyrus; T1, longitudinal relaxation time; T2, transverse relaxation time; TBSS, tract-based statistical software; TE, echo time; TR, repetition time; tSLF, temporal superior longitudinal fasciculus; TT, Taliarach and Tournoux; UCSD, university of California, San Diego; UF, uncinate fasciculus; VIQ, verbal intelligence quotient.
Supp Table cTable C: Summary of functional connectivity changesDC, degree of centrality; IntHCor, interhemispheric correlations; DMN, default mode network; L, left hemisphere side of a ROI; R, Right hemisphere side of a ROI; RegCoh, regional activity coherence; TNN, task-negative network (dorsal and ventral medial prefrontal cortex, the posterior cingulate cortex/precuneus, left and right angular gyrus, right temporal pole, and right superior temporal gyrus/superior temporal sulcus); ↓, reduced (connectivity unless otherwise stated) in disorder groups; ↑, increased (connectivity unless otherwise stated) in disorder groups.
