Introduction
Hyperglycemia is common in the post–cardiac surgery population and has been associated with increased mortality, surgical length of stay (LOS), and infection rates, especially deep sternal wound infections (DSWIs).1–7 Stress associated with cardiac surgery causes blood glucose (BG) level elevations in patients with and without diabetes.8 Several observational intensive care unit (ICU) studies of these patients have reported higher rates of complications and mortality in patients with diabetes after cardiac surgery.9 Conversely, recent work on hospitalized patients with hyperglycemia raises the concern that patients with stress hyperglycemia (SH) have worse outcomes.10–12
In 2002, Umpierrez et al10 reported that patients with newly diagnosed hyperglycemia have worse ICU and hospital outcomes than those with known diabetes. This finding has been reproduced in several other observational studies of mixed ICU populations,12,13 studies on post–acute myocardial infarction patients,14 and those on total parenteral nutrition administration.15 Additionally, several prospective studies have shown patients with SH to have improved morbidity and mortality, as well as better BG control.16,17 These studies suggest that elevated BG levels affect patients with both diabetes and SH, and that appropriate treatment may improve outcomes.
Blood glucose management goals in the ICU are currently evolving as large prospective trials update their results. Improvements in DSWI and mortality rates in patients with diabetes by lowering BG targets to < 200 mg/dL were first described by the Portland group.1 An initial large trial16 in surgical ICU patients reported a significantly lower rate of morbidity and mortality by targeting euglycemia (BG, 80–110 mg/dL) compared with standard care. Several other multicenter trials that followed18–20 could not reproduce this finding and had worse mortality outcomes with tight BG control. Results of the Normoglycemia in Intensive Care Evaluation–Survival Using Glucose Algorithm Regulation (NICE-SUGAR) trial19 led to a modification of BG targets in the ICU to 140 to 180 mg/dL.21–23 Lower ICU targets (110–140 mg/dL) were recommended by the American Diabetes Association21 if they could be safely achieved and in cardiac surgery patients who required > 3 days of ICU care (< 150 mg/dL).23
Although these studies have addressed tight (ie, 80–100 mg/dL)16 and usual (ie, 140–180 mg/dL)19 BG ranges, data are still inadequate on safety and outcomes of targeting BG levels in the moderate range (100–140 mg/dL) for patients with SH and diabetes separately.24 Therefore, the objective of this study was to analyze and compare mortality and complication rates of cardiac surgery patients with either SH or diabetes managed to achieve similar moderate BG goals at the University of Michigan Hospital (Ann Arbor, MI). The incidence of hypoglycemia and its implications on the outcomes in this population were also assessed.
Methods
This is an observational study of 1973 patients who underwent cardiac surgery from 2005 to 2008, and were also followed by the Hospital Intensive Insulin Program (HIIP). A standardized institutional insulin infusion protocol was strictly implemented in the cardiothoracic ICU in late 2004, targeting a BG goal of 100 to 140 mg/dL. This protocol, derived partially from the Portland protocol,1 was developed prior to initial inpatient recommendations from the American Diabetes Association and American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists,2,25 and was validated within this institution. Although at the program's initiation this BG goal was chosen as a prudent and safe starting point, it was later determined not to lower BG targets, as data on higher incidence of hypoglycemia with tighter BG goals began to emerge.18,26,27 This resulted in maintaining uniform BG ranges in all post–cardiac surgery patients at this level for several years.
Education on BG control, protocol nuances, as well as an insulin titration algorithm were provided to all health care providers in the cardiovascular ICU, including physicians, nurses, mid-level providers, medical assistants, and pharmacists. The use of the protocol (Appendix A) was mandated in the ICU. The HIIP provided oversight to ICU BG management by following all patients with diabetes and those with SH who were required to continue the insulin infusion for > 2 postoperative days. After admission to the ICU, BG surveillance was by point-of-care testing using ACCU-CHEK® monitors (Roche Diagnostics). Insulin infusions were initiated and typically continued for 3 days. Transition to subcutaneous insulin followed a basal-bolus algorithm initiated before discontinuing the insulin infusion.28 Briefly, basal insulin was provided with either neutral protamine Hagedorn insulin for patients with SH, as previously described,29 or glargine insulin for patients with diabetes. Insulin aspart was used as bolus insulin for meals and correction in both groups.
Patient PopulationPatients who underwent cardiac surgery (eg, coronary artery bypass graft surgery, valve replacement, aortic root procedures, left ventricular assist device procedures, or a combination of these) at this institution were included in the analysis. Those who underwent initial surgeries at outside hospitals and were transferred for complication management were excluded.
BG TestingHourly BG tests were performed using hospital point-of-care ACCU-CHEK® monitors. Insulin infusion rates were titrated hourly until patients reached a stable BG level of 100 to 140 mg/dL for 3 successive hours, when titration frequency was reduced to every 2 hours. Blood glucose samples were initially obtained through arterial catheters for the first 26 to 30 hours, and after loss of arterial access, capillary BG samples were obtained.
Data ExtractionData were obtained by chart review and data mining of the hospital electronic medical record database from 2005 to 2008. Patients with diabetes were identified as those with known history of type 1 or type 2 diabetes and/or treated with oral medications and/or insulin at the time of surgery. Stress hyperglycemia was defined by absence of history of diabetes or hypoglycemic medication use, but with 2 consecutive postoperative BG levels ≥ 140 mg/dL 1 hour apart, or 1 BG level ≥ 200 mg/dL.22 We collected both point-of-care and laboratory BG levels from day of surgery until postoperative day 2. Blood glucose level variability during the insulin infusion was represented by the standard deviation over that day.
Outcome Measures and DefinitionsThe primary outcome measure of this study was 30- and 90-day postoperative mortality. Secondary outcome measures were the incidence of complications (eg, DSWI, postoperative atrial fibrillation, acute requirement of dialysis, cerebrovascular disease, or bacteremia or other infections) and the incidence of hypoglycemia in patients with diabetes and SH.Mortality included both death during hospitalization and that occurring after discharge from the hospital within 30 and 90 days of the procedure. Deep sternal wound infections were defined according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention definition30 and collected by the Department of Infection Control & Epidemiology. This was expansive, and all infections beyond wound drainage were captured, including all incisional and organ-space infections (ie, mediastinitis). Atrial fibrillation was defined as new-onset atrial fibrillation requiring treatment. Postoperative bacteremia with positive blood culture results was identified as bacteremia. Other infections, such as cellulitis, urinary tract infections, and cholecystitis, were collected by chart review of the discharge summary. Hypoglycemia was defined as a BG level ≤ 60 mg/dL and severe hypoglycemia as a BG level ≤ 40 mg/dL. Surgical LOS was calculated by subtracting the date of surgery from the date of discharge.
Statistical AnalysisThe study was approved by the University of Michigan Institutional Review Board. Baseline characteristics were compared between the diabetes and SH groups using t tests for continuous variables and Fisher's exact test or a chi-square test for categorical variables. Because surgical LOS was not normally distributed, it was transformed to the square root of each observation prior to analysis. Patients with left ventricular assist devices have prolonged hospitalizations, and this group was excluded from the surgical LOS analysis. Multivariate analysis was performed to explore the association between statistically significant outcomes and the covariates of interest. The variables considered to be potential confounders from the univariate analysis were included in multiple regression models and then removed individually to examine the change in estimate of the exposure. Variables that changed the estimate by > 10% were retained and a final model was built. A P value of ≤ 0.05 was considered statistically significant. The statistical analysis was performed using both SPSS, version 17 and SAS, version 9.1 software.
Results
DemographicValid data were obtained from 1973 patients who underwent cardiac surgery and were included in this analysis. Of these, 33% (n = 648) had a preexisting diagnosis of diabetes (type 1 or type 2) and 67% (n = 1325) had SH. Table 1 compares the demographic characteristics, types of surgery, and glycemic profiles of these groups. Patients with diabetes were significantly older (63.2 ± 10.6 vs 61.2 ± 14.1 years; P < 0.0001), had greater body mass indices (29.2 ± 6.51 vs 26.4 ± 5.9 kg/m2; P < 0.001), and had more cardiovascular risk factors, such as smoking and hypertension. Thirty-seven percent of patients with diabetes were treated with subcutaneous insulin preoperatively and 67% were on oral hypoglycemic agents. Different types of surgical procedures predominated in the 2 groups; coronary artery bypass graft surgery was the most common procedure among patients with diabetes (54%) and aortic root procedures or valve replacements were most common in patients with SH (64%).
Mortality OutcomesMortality rates within the first 30 days after surgery were similar between the 2 groups (3.4% for patients with diabetes and 2.3% for patients with SH; P = 0.2), as were mortality rates at 90 days (4.6% for patients with diabetes and 3.5% for patients with SH; P = 0.3). Mortality was not statistically significant in patients who experienced severe hypoglycemia compared with patients without hypoglycemia (P = 0.41 and P = 0.32, respectively). There were no deaths in patients with diabetes or SH who experienced severe hypoglycemia (Table 2).
BG ProfilesBlood glucose levels achieved are shown in Table 1 and Figure 1. Mean BG levels on the day of surgery through postoperative day 2 were significantly higher in the diabetes compared with the SH group (P < 0.0001 for all days), as was the variability represented here by the standard deviation (Table 1). Approximately 60% and 80% of BG levels fell between the target of 100 to 140 mg/dL in the diabetes and SH groups, respectively (Figure 1), and 90% of BG levels were between 100 to 180 mg/dL in both groups. There was a very low rate (1%) of severe hypoglycemia (BG level ≤ 40 mg/dL). The overall rate of BG level ≤ 60 mg/dL was significantly higher in the diabetes group (16%, with mean BG level of 50.7 mg/dL) compared with the SH group (9%, with mean BG level of 49.7 mg/dL; P < 0.0001).
Postoperative ComplicationsRates of DSWI were higher in patients with diabetes compared with those with SH in unadjusted analysis and after adjust ing for type of surgery, (3.4% vs 1.6%; P = 0.01; Table 3). However, on multivariate analysis, presence of diabetes was no longer a significant factor in those with diabetes (Table 4). Body mass index and a high mean BG level, especially on postoperative day 2, were positively associated with DSWIs. Mean BG levels in patients with DSWIs were not statistically significant when compared with those of patients without DSWIs (Table 5). Patients with SH had a higher rate of new-onset atrial fibrillation compared with those with diabetes (24.5% vs 19.9%; P = 0.02). There were no statistically significant differences in other postoperative complications, including bacteremia, acute renal failure requiring dialysis, cerebrovascular accidents, and other infections (Table 3).
Surgical LOSPatients with diabetes had a longer mean surgical LOS than patients with SH (10.5 days vs 8.8 days; P < 0.002). However, after multivariate analysis, the difference in mean surgical LOS was no longer significant.
Discussion
In this study evaluating post–cardiac surgery patients, we demonstrate that using a standardized insulin protocol and targeting a moderate BG range of 100 to 140 mg/dL was associated with a low risk of hypoglycemia and low mortality rates in both diabetes and SH populations. Additionally, mortality and complication rates were not statistically different between the 2 groups. This was despite the patients in the diabetes group being older, as well as having higher body mass indices and postoperative BG levels. Therefore, a BG goal of 100 to 140 mg/dL using insulin titration via the University of Michigan Hospital protocol was a reasonable and safe approach for hyperglycemia management in both groups.
The results of this study are similar to those of Finney et al,31 who studied a mixed ICU population with and without diabetes, and whose cardiac surgery subset was also heterogeneous. The largest proportion of that study's survivor group had BG levels between 111 to 144 mg/dL, and accrued mortality benefits with a BG range of < 144 to 200 mg/dL (estimated upper limit of BG level at 145 mg/dL), similar to the BG goals used in our study. In 2 other studies32,33 of mixed ICU populations, the survivor groups had BG levels < 145 mg/dL; however, in contrast to our study, their SH group had a higher mortality rate than the diabetes group for similar BG targets. Several other observational retrospective studies10–12 have now shown that for any level of hyperglycemia, mortality rates are increased in SH groups. The mortality differences between the SH and diabetes groups could be secondary to the mixed nature of the ICU populations. Additionally, fewer patients with diabetes (only 20%–30%) spent their time in the < 145 mg/dL BG range, unlike our study, in which > 50% of the BG levels of patients with diabetes were within target range. Although the ratio of survivors to nonsurvivors in the 111 to 144 mg/dL range did not attain statistical significance, survival rate was still highest in this range.32
The mortality rates and other complications in this study are similar to those reported in previous studies.9,31 Prior to the glucose management era, Herlitz et al34 reported that postoperative complications, especially cardiac death and stroke, were increased in patients with diabetes up to 5 years after coronary artery bypass graft surgery. Schmeltz et al9 reported an overall higher mortality rate in patients with diabetes compared with those without diabetes (7.3% vs 3.3%, respectively) who were managed with tight BG control (BG level, 80–110 mg/dL) after cardiac surgery. They attributed these differences to preexisting renal failure, nonelective surgery, and female sex.9 Our approach of controlling BG levels to a moderate range, as described, appears to “bridge the diabetes disadvantage gap,”1 and equalize outcomes between the SH and diabetes groups. Our surgical LOS trended downward, especially with single-procedure surgeries, such as aortic root procedures, valve replacement, and coronary artery bypass graft surgery only. Surgical LOS had several other confounding factors. The valve replacements included younger patients with mitral and tricuspid valve repairs, and the aortic group, which included patients who had higher risks due comorbidities. These contribute to the variable surgical LOS in our cohort.
The rates of DSWI were higher for patients with diabetes in unadjusted analysis, but the difference was no longer significant in multivariate analysis. The influence of several other factors must be considered for complication rates in patients with diabetes, although conclusive data on their effect are not yet available. Some of these include preoperative BG levels,35,36 glucose variability,37 and post-ICU and post-discharge BG levels. A higher rate of atrial fibrillation noted in the patients with SH can be explained by the higher proportion of valve replacements performed in this group. Valvular abnormalities are associated with cardiac hyper-trophy and left atrial dilation, which may lead to electrical excitability and arrhythmias.
Another important finding in this study is the low level of severe hypoglycemia (BG level ≤ 40 mg/dL) seen in the immediate postoperative period. Hypoglycemia in this population was not associated with increased mortality. Unlike the intensive or control arm of several recent large, prospective, multicenter trials in mixed ICU populations with higher hypoglycemia and mortality rates,18–20,24 our study data are strictly postoperative. This could suggest that hypoglycemia early in the postoperative period may not have the same clinical implication as that in the medical ICU. Stress hormones are maximally elevated after surgery and a further increase with hypoglycemia may have minimal effect on outcomes. Also, postoperative patients are not metabolically compromised for prolonged periods of time and maintain their responses to hypoglycemia.38,39 This could be part of the explanation for differences in rates of both hypoglycemia and mortality in the 2 Leuven studies.16,40 Several studies have evaluated the prevalence of hypoglycemia and mortality in different ICU populations.41–44 As in this study, Stamou et al42 found no independent association between hypoglycemia and mortality. This is unlike several studies of mixed ICU populations in which hypoglycemia and mortality were found to have some association.32,43,44 Analyzing an early ICU stay period similar to ours, an Australian study found high mortality rates with both hypo- and hyperglycemia.13 In this large Australian cohort, 24 ICUs were included, and therefore standardization of insulin protocols or ICU care was less likely. They also documented patients’ mean admission-day BG levels, which usually has the largest excursion and an initial lag time before BG targets are reached.45
Although recent studies have published moderate BG goals46,47 in the cardiac surgery population, this is the first study to evaluate SH and diabetes groups separately in this BG range. Other strengths of this study are that its large sample size is a well-characterized cohort, and that a standardized approach for managing BG levels was used. Like the study by Finney et al,31 various types of cardiac surgeries with different demographic characteristics were evaluated, and therefore a heterogeneous population was available for analysis. In addition, BG data targeted to moderate BG goals over several years were available for analysis.
The study's limitations include issues related to conducting a retrospective review at a single medical center. The clinical data sets were created partly by chart review and partly by electronic data extraction. Before the HIIP was implemented, data on BG levels, diabetes history, and SH were not consistently gathered, and therefore a pre- and postintervention comparison was not possible. Information on disease severity and nutrition were not collected and thus could not be assessed. Because glycated hemoglobin levels were checked in only patients with diabetes, some patients assigned to the SH group may have had undiagnosed type 2 diabetes and therefore would have been misclassified. Finally, treatment improvements and initiatives would affect outcomes positively, while infection outbreaks would have a negative effect. These effects cannot be fully accounted for in an observational review.
Conclusion
Using a standardized institutional protocol and targeting a moderate BG range in early post–cardiac surgery patients maintained BG levels within target range for the SH and diabetes groups. Mortality and complication rates were low and hypoglycemia was not associated with mortality in either group. These data suggest that patients in different hospital populations (eg, surgical, medical, non-ICU) may need to be managed to achieve different BG goals, and provides basis for future randomized control trials.
