Introduction
Benign prostatic hyperplasia (BPH) is one of the most commonly diagnosed
medical conditions in older men. U.S. population-based studies showed an age-related
increase in prevalence of BPH, which rises to nearly 50% in men by their eighth
decade of life1. BPH is a chronic
disease associated with a gradual deterioration of lower urinary tract symptoms
(LUTS). Pharmacological treatments such as alpha blockers and 5 alpha-reductase
inhibitors (5ARIs) are commonly used to improve LUTS and prevent serious outcomes
such as acute urinary retention (AUR). Nevertheless when medical therapy fails,
invasive interventions become necessary.
5ARIs are among the most commonly used pharmacological treatments for BPH,
particularly for patients with larger prostates2,3. They act by
inhibiting the enzyme 5α-reductase, thus promoting prostatic apoptosis,
reducing prostate size and improving urinary symptoms. In practice, poor adherence
to 5ARIs is a well-recognized problem. A study showed 1-yr adherence to 5ARIs for
BPH was only 29%, and patients on combined therapies had an even higher
discontinuation rate4. Although
multiple clinical trials showed 5ARIs could reduce the risk of AUR or the need for
surgery5–9, the relationship between levels of adherence
and long-term clinical outcomes has not been determined.
The aim of this study was to evaluate drug adherence and long-term clinical
outcomes in patients administered 5ARIs for LUTS related to BPH. We conducted this
study using population health management claims data, which included statistics on
health status, health care utilization and costs for patients. Claims data also
record medication dispenses, which can be a reliable source to evaluate medication
adherence and indicate medication-refill behavior among patients with chronic
diseases such as BPH10–12. Furthermore, using direct claims
data as a measure of medication adherence can eliminate potential recall biasThe aim
was to evaluate drug adherence and long-term clinical outcomes in patients
administered 5ARIs therapy for LUTS related to benign prostatic hyperplasia.
Methods
Data sourcesOur study relied on Medicare claims data for male beneficiaries age 65
and older and aligned to Partners Healthcare within the NextGen Accountable Care
Organization. Partners HealthCare in Boston, Massachusetts was founded by
Brigham and Women’s Hospital and Massachusetts General Hospital. It has
one of the largest health care networks in North America including hospitals,
community health centers, physician practices, and post-acute care
facilities.Data included medical and pharmacy claims data from January 2012 thru
December 31, 2017 and merged clinical and demographic information. Comprehensive
clinical information from each patient was generated during the course of
patient care from multiple clinical and administrative computing systems.
Information on BPH treatment such as pharmacy information, medical diagnoses,
and initial visit information was captured. Computerized pharmacy records for
102,240 5ARI prescriptions dispensed for 5,700 clinic patients were generated
during the study period using International Classification of Diseases (ICD)
codes. All data were de-identified.
Study populationTwenty-three percent (n=5,700) of all patients who were diagnosed with
BPH during the study period were prescribed 5ARIs (including finasteride and
dutasteride) with claims that contain the following diagnosis codes: 600.0 to
600.3, and 600.9. Patients with more than one dispensation of 5ARIs for a
diagnosis of BPH commencing in the period January 2012 to December 2017 were
enrolled in the study on the date their first prescription for 5ARIs was
dispensed. Patients who received 5ARIs before July 2012 were excluded to ensure
that all individuals had not been prescribed 5ARIs for at least six months
before the initiation of 5ARIs treatment. Patients with a diagnosis of prostate
cancer (185, 198.82, 233.4, 236.5, 239.5, V10.46) or bladder cancer (188, 198.1,
223.3, 233.7, 236.7, 239.4, V10.51) at any time during the follow up were also
excluded from analysis.
Pharmacy-based adherenceFigure 1 demonstrates the study
design scheme. We evaluated automated pharmacy records for the twelve months
following the date 5ARI treatment was started. Adherence was calculated using
proportion of days covered (PDC)13, which is supported by the International Society for
Pharmaceutical Outcomes Research14. PDC is defined as the ratio of days that a patient
supplied with medication to the total number of days in a year
(PDC1yr=[1-(days without medication)/365]). For example,
PDC1yr =0.80 means that a patient had enough medication 80% of
the time in the first year of 5ARIs treatment. High level of adherence to
medication in chronic disease was defined as PDC ⩾ 80% in many
studies15–17. Thus, we categorized
adherence to medication into binary outcomes, where patients had either a high
level of adherence (PDC ≥ 0.80) or a low level of adherence (PDC <
0.80). We also conducted sensitivity analyses for adherence measured up to two
and three years from the date 5ARIs were initiated.
Demographic and clinical variablesBaseline information was collected on the date patients were dispensed
their first 5ARI regimen including age, race, veteran status, marital status,
education level, smoking status, and alcohol use. Pharmacy information was also
collected including brand name, and dosage. Comorbidity within the first year of
follow-up was evaluated based on the diagnosis data using ICD codes. Severity
risk factors such as hematuria and bladder stones as well as hypertension,
diabetes, erectile dysfunction, and mental disorder were included in the
analysis. BPH related complications were evaluated using the Thomson Medstat
Disease Staging coding methods18. This method is a coding criterion based on ICD diagnosis
codes and supported by the Healthcare Cost and Utilization Project as a
classification system. Patients were categorized into uncomplicated (stage 1) or
complicated BPH (stage 2 or more) based on ICD codes during the first year of
evaluation.
BPH related surgeryThe outcome of the study was 5ARI treatment failure defined by the
occurrence of a BPH related surgery. This included surgical treatment and
minimally invasive therapy using Current Procedural Terminology (CPT) codes
(52601, 52612, 52614, 52620, 52640, 52647, 52648, 55801, 55821, 55831, 52850,
52852, and 52853). We evaluated the outcome starting one year after the
initiation of 5ARIs. The time to 5ARI treatment failure was defined as the time
from the index date to the first BPH related surgery. All patients were followed
until the 5ARI failure, death, loss follow up, or the end of study
(12/31/2018).
Statistical AnalysisUnivariate and multivariate Cox proportional hazards regression analysis
was performed to determine the relative hazard of 5ARIs treatment failure by the
level of adherence to 5ARIs, controlling for other factors. All analysis was
done using STATA.
Results
We identified 3,107 patients for study inclusion (Figure 2). The majority of the patients who initiated
their first 5ARI treatment during the study period were white males who were
non-smokers and non-alcohol users with an average age of 77.5 (Table 1). 89.1% of the study cohort was treated with
finasteride, and only 10.9% was treated with dutasteride. BPH stage was evaluated
during the first year of the follow-up. The majority of patients (91.2%) were
characterized with stage 1 level of BPH severity (i.e., without bladder outlet
obstruction, hydronephrosis, renal failure, sepsis, or shock). Patients categorized
as stage 1 were less likely to fail compared to patients categorized as stage 2 or
more.. 8% of the patients presented with hematuria and 3.3% with bladder stones.
23.5% of the study cohort was also diagnosed with hypertension, 9.1% with diabetes,
3.5% with mental disorder and 3.1% with erectile dysfunction. The mean follow-up
time was 1354 days, during which 373 (12.0%) received BPH related surgery.
As shown in the Kaplan-Meier curve in Figure
3, low level of adherence to 5ARIs was significantly associated with
shorter time to BPH related surgery (log-rank test p = 0.0372). The results of
sensitivity analyses conducted using adherence measured for two years and three
years were similar. When adjusted for age, BPH stage, presence of hematuria, bladder
stone, and type of 5ARIs, Multivariate Cox proportional hazard regression analysis
revealed the hazard ratio (HR) was 1.29 (95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.04 to 1.62,
p = 0.023) (Table 2). Moreover, we found that
the presence of bladder stones (HR = 1.71, 95% CI: 1.02 to 2.87, p = 0.042) and
finasteride use (HR = 1.42, 95% CI: 1.01 to 1.98, p = 0.044) were significant risk
factors for BPH related surgery. Other factors including high BPH stage and presence
of hematuria were related to poor outcomes however, they were not significant in the
adjusted model.
Discussion
This study aimed to evaluate the impact of 5ARI drug adherence on long-term
clinical outcomes among a cohort of patients diagnosed with BPH. Among patients
initiating their first 5ARI regimen, we found that patients with low level of
adherence are 27% more likely to need a BPH related surgery compared to those with
high level of adherence. An association between adherence to 5ARI treatment and
better clinical outcome is expected and has been reported4. However, long-term studies using
longitudinal claims data are warranted.
5α-reductase is an enzyme that catalyzes the conversion of
testosterone to 5α-dihydrotestosterone (DHT), which is involved in the
pathogenesis of prostatic hyperplasia. 5ARIs including finasteride and dutasteride
act as competitive and specific inhibitors of 5α-reductase to prevent
conversion of testosterone to DHT, which ultimately reduces prostate size6,19,20 to relieve
patients of bladder outlet obstruction. Multiple studies21–23 suggest that larger prostate volumes are associated with higher
risk of BPH progression. Clinical trials such as the Proscar Long-Term Efficacy and
Safety Study (PLESS) and the Medical Therapy of Prostatic Symptoms (MTOPS) study
have demonstrated that 5ARIs have the potential for long-term reduction in prostate
volume and need for prostate surgery4,24. Nevertheless,
other observational studies have failed to demonstrate the effectiveness of 5ARI
therapy in treating men with BPH25,26. One possible explanation is that
findings from clinical trials cannot be generalized to men outside the
study’s inclusion criteria. Moreover, patients undergoing long-term treatment
in a real-world setting may exhibit lower adherence to the prescribed course of
treatment compared to those in a clinical trial setting27.
Our results are consistent with those of a previous study from Cindolo et
al4. They reported that,
among men aged 40 years old, one year adherence to 5ARI treatment for BPH was 29%
and discontinuation was an independent risk factor for hospitalization for BPH and
BPH surgery (HR 1.65 and 2.80; p < 0.0001). Nonetheless, adherence and
discontinuation are different. Some patients who failed to show improvement early in
the treatment and discontinued may later restart the original treatment, and thus
may have been inappropriately classified as non-adherent. Thus, discontinuation can
only represent adherence when the level of adherence is very low28. In our study, we measured adherence by PDC
instead of discontinuation, which is supported by the International Society for
Pharmaceutical Outcomes Research14.
We also found several factors that could influence the probability of
surgical intervention. These factors included higher BPH stage, the presence of
bladder stones, and whether or not the initiating treatment was finasteride. BPH
stage defined by Thomson Medstat Disease Staging Criteria18 was used to measure BPH severity. The
presence with hematuria and/or bladder stones was also included to capture
additional severity risks18. In
our multivariable analysis, once the presence of hematuria and/or bladder stones was
included, the information gained from BPH stage was no longer statistically
significant in predicting outcomes. Bladder stones are commonly associated with
bladder outlet obstruction, chronic urinary tract infection and neurogenic
bladder29. We demonstrated
that the presence of bladder stones was strongly associated with poor outcomes. We
also found that patients using finasteride were 41% more likely to require surgical
intervention compared to dutasteride. Currently, there are two 5ARIs approved in the
United States: finasteride and dutasteride. Dutasteride, a dual 5ARI, results in a
significantly greater decrease in dihydrotestosterone compared to finasteride, which
is a selective inhibitor of the type 2 isoenzyme30,31. Our findings are
inconsistent with previous studies, which showed no overall differences in clinical
outcomes between the two treatments14. These inconsistent results may be due to the longer follow-up
in our study or the imbalance between regimens (only 10.9% of patients in our study
received dutasteride while 89.1% received finasteride).
We acknowledge that there are limitations to our analysis. Firstly, when we
measured medication adherence with claims data, we assumed that patients consumed
all medication as prescribed. Thus, it may be possible to overestimate the
percentage of patients who are adherent to their medication. Secondly, there was
selection bias since patients in our study were Medicare beneficiaries (i.e.:
≥ 65 years of age). The results could be different among younger
patients. Finally, although we adjusted our results using BPH stage generated by
diagnosis information, diagnostic tests and biochemical results were missing. It
would be useful to link prostate size or PSA levels to each individual as variations
in BPH severity between different adherent groups are likely. Despite these
limitations, this is one of the few studies providing insight into drug adherence
and the impact on clinical outcome for 5ARIs treatment for BPH.
Conclusion
In conclusion, low levels of adherence to 5ARI treatment in patients with
BPH are associated with higher probability of BPH related surgery and poor outcomes.
Therefore, intervention strategies are needed to increase adherence to 5ARIs
treatment after patients are diagnosed.
