INTRODUCTION
Genetic lipodystrophies are rare disorders characterized by body fat loss and predisposition to metabolic complications of insulin resistance [Garg, 2011]. In the last decade or so, mutations in several genes have been implicated in causing various subtypes of lipodystrophies [Garg, 2011]. For example, mutations in AGPAT2, BSCL2, CAV1, and PTRF are associated with congenital generalized lipodystrophies; mutations in LMNA, PPARG, AKT2, PLIN1, and CIDEC with familial partial lipodystrophies and mutations in LMNA and ZMPSTE24 are reported in patients with Hutchin-son–Gilford progeria and mandibuloacral dysplasia associated lipodystrophies [Garg, 2013]. Recently, mutations in PSMB8, PCYT1A, PIK3R1, FOS, and POLD1 have been reported in patients with extremely rare subtypes of lipodystrophies [Agarwal et al., 2010; Dyment et al., 2013; Knebel et al., 2013; Thauvin-Robinet et al., 2013; Weedon et al., 2013; Payne et al., 2014]. Despite this progress, molecular basis of many extremely rare lipodystrophy patients with distinctive phenotypes remains unclear. Using whole exome sequencing in the parents and probands (trios), we report heterozygous de novo disease-causing mutations in caveolin 1 (CAV1) gene in two patients presenting with neonatal onset of generalized loss of subcutaneous fat but sparing the buttocks with additional distinctive phenotypic features.
PATIENTS AND METHODS
All patients and their relatives provided written informed consent to participate in the study. For minors, their parents provided the consent. The study protocol was approved by the Institutional Review Board of UT Southwestern Medical Center. DNA was extracted from peripheral blood leucocytes from the patients and their relatives. Of the total of 14 probands referred to us with a novel subtype of generalized lipodystrophy presenting in the neonatal period, DNA from the parents and the patient (Trio) was available from six of them. Exome sequencing of five of these trios was performed at the University of Washington’s Center for Mendelian Genomics (UW-CMG) and of one trio by Ambry Genetics.
Two of these patients, NLD 1500.4 and NLD 2800.5 were found to have heterozygous de novo novel loss of function mutations in the CAV1 gene. Their clinical features are reported in detail here while the clinical features of the other four patients are summarized in Table I.
Patient 1 (NLD 1500.4)This 7-year-old Caucasian boy from Spain underwent a detailed evaluation at UT Southwestern Medical Center at the age of 26 months (Fig. 1A and B, Table I). He was born full term at 39.5 weeks gestation with a birth weight of 2,930 g and a birth length 51 cm. He was noted to have thin skin, dysmorphic facies, and poor fat distribution (Fig. 2A and B). His feet and hands were bluish–purple. Although his linear growth had been normal, he had poor weight gain. He had no cognitive delay and had normal developmental milestones and teething. His hair was thin and grew slowly but the nails grew normally. He had frequent bowel movements, 4–5 times a day and increased thirst and polyuria which have spontaneously resolved at age 7. There was no parental consanguinity. He has two normal siblings.Examination revealed generalized loss of subcutaneous fat, thin, dry skin with clearly visible dermal vessels suggestive of cutis marmorata (Fig. 1A and B). Subcutaneous fat was markedly deficient all over except for on the buttocks. He also had poor musculature. He had sparse blonde hair on the scalp, eyelashes, and eyebrows. The face was triangular with thin pointed nose and small mouth. The eyes were normal. He had no joint contractures. Cardiovascular and pulmonary examinations were normal. Abdomen was slightly protuberant and liver was just palpable under the costal margin. He had a normal phallus and the testes were descended. The fontanelles were closed. He had low set ears but had normal hearing. The fundus examination was normal.Cardiac echocardiography and abdominal sonography were normal. Skeletal roentgenograms were normal with no evidence of clavicular or phalangeal resorption. Urinary osmolality was 726 mOsm/kg (normal range: 50–1,200 mOsm/kg)while his serum osmolality was 279 mOsm/kg (normal range: 278–305 mOsm/kg). His serum glucose, lipids, insulin, alanine aminotransferase, and aspartate aminotransferase levels were normal but alkaline phosphatase (742 IU/L; normal range: 50–300 IU/L) and lactate dehydrogenase (466 IU/L; normal range: 100–450 IU/L) levels were increased and HDL-cholesterol level was low (Table I).At the age of 30 months, he was noted to have advanced bilateral cataract formation requiring surgery. Currently, he has sunken cheeks, pinched nose, and excessive wrinkling of the face and marked, generalized loss of subcutaneous fat except from the abdomen and buttocks. A recent echocardiography was normal with pulmonary artery pressure in the normal range. He had normal serum calcium, phosphate, alkaline phosphatase, and intact parathyroid hormone concentrations.
Patient 2 (NLD 2800.5)This 22-month-old Caucasian girl was born at full term (Fig. 1C and D). Ultrasound examination in utero at 20 weeks gestation identified unilateral pleural effusion which resolved by 33 weeks gestation. She was small for gestational age and had pleural effusion at birth. She had a marked generalized lack of subcutaneous fat and mottled skin (Fig. 2C and D). She had a large fontanelle. She also had bilateral spontaneous pneumothorax which resolved after 4 days. She fed poorly and had dysphagia and chronic aspiration. At 2 months of age, a nasogastric tube was placed followed by a G-tube at age of 9 months. She has no cognitive delay. She had cyclical vomiting and diarrhea. The parents had no history of consanguinity. She had two older healthy brothers. She was taking lansoprazole and cyproheptadine.Examination revealed generalized loss of subcutaneous fat, thin mottled skin with cutis marmorata (Fig. 1C and D, Table I). She had a triangular face with small lips. The anterior fontanelle was open. She had normal hearing. Teeth were small and yellowish. Eyes were normal with normal eyelashes and eyebrows. She had biparietal thinning of the scalp hair. She had no scoliosis or other joint problems. She had normal subcutaneous fat on the gluteal region. Her height was 81 cm with an arm span of 82 cm, arm length of 31 cm, and leg length of 38 cm. There was no asymmetry of the limbs or clinodactyly.Her serum glucose, lipids, calcium, phosphorus, magnesium and vitamin D, prolactin, and insulin values were all normal but HDL cholesterol level was low (Table I). Computerized tomography of the chest at 18 months of age revealed pulmonary arteriovenous malformation in the left lower lobe. Lung biopsy revealed evidence of pulmonary arterial hypertension. Echocardiography at 28 months of age estimated pulmonary arterial pressure to be 60 mm Hg. Heart catheterization revealed pulmonary artery pressure of 40–50 mm Hg while right atrial pressure was 11 mm Hg. She is currently 36 months old. Molecular diagnostic studies for Hutchinson–Gilford progeria syndrome including genotyping for LMNA and ZMPSTE24 were negative and microarray chromosomal analysis (1.8M probes by Quest) was normal.
Exome SequencingOne out of six trios was processed by Ambry Genetics (∼30 × coverage of the Agilent Sure SelectXT Human All Exon 50 Mb target, 2 × 100 bp Illumina HiSeq sequencing) while the other five trios were processed by the University of Washington Center for Mendelian Genomics (UW–CMG). The initial QC at UW–CMG entails DNA quantification, sex typing, and molecular “fingerprinting” using a 96-plex genotyping assay. Library construction (using 1 µg of genomic DNA) and exome capture are automated (Perkin–Elmer Janus II) in 96-well plate format. Libraries undergo exome capture using the ∼63 Mb target from Roche/Nimblegen SeqCap EZ v3.0. Prior to sequencing, library concentration is determined by triplicate qPCR and molecular weight distributions are verified on Agilent Bioanalyzer 2,100. Individual exome multiplex-compatible libraries are pooled into sets of 24–96 samples using liquid handling robotics. Sequencing-by-synthesis is carried out on the Illumina HiSeq platform (2 × 50bp reads). Current throughput is sufficient to complete a 3–4 multiplexed exomes per lane at high coverage (60–80 × mean coverage).Sequencing data processing involved: (i) base calling (Illumina RTA 1.13); (ii) demultiplexing and conversion into unaligned BAM files by lane and index sequence (Illumina Basecalls To Sam and Picard Extract Illumina Barcodes); (iii) alignment to the human reference (hg19/GRCh37) using BWA [Li and Durbin 2009]. Read-pairs not mapping within ± 2 standard deviations of the average library size (∼125 ± 15 bp for exomes) were removed. Following QC, individual-level data were merged and subjected to the following steps: (i) base quality recalibration using GATK TableR-ecalibration; (ii) reads with duplicate start positions were removed; (iii) indel realignment using GATK Indel Realigner, and (iv) variant calling using multiple samples with the Unified Genotyper routine of GATK 1.6–11 [DePristo et al., 2011]. Multi-sample VCF files were filtered for 1,000 Genomes and NHLBI GO Exome Sequencing Project variants with a frequency of more than 1%, minimum reported quality values (QUAL ≥ 250, GQ ≥ 30, QD ≥ 5, AB ≤ 0.8), and minimum site coverage (DP) of 8. All remaining variants were required a mapability value of 1 (UCSC wg Encode-Duke Mapability-Uniqueness 35 bp). Variant effects were annotated using Ensembl Variant Effect Predictor [McLaren et al., 2010].
Sanger SequencingAll three exons and the splice site junctions of CAV1 were amplified with gene specific primers (available on request). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was assembled as described earlier [Agarwal et al., 2002]. The PCR product was purified to remove primers and dNTP’s and sequenced using Sanger technique with ABI Prism 3100.
Cell cultureHuman dermal fibroblasts from one of the patients (NLD 2800.5) and a control subject were grown in Dulbecco’s Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) supplemented with antibiotic–antimycotic and 10% fetal bovine serum. Cell cultures were maintained in a humidified incubator at 37°C in 5% CO2.
Immunofluorescence StainingThe cells were seeded on sterile glass 35 mm MaTTek dishes. Cells were washed with PBS, fixed with 3% paraformaldehyde in PBS containing 200 mM sucrose for 30 min and were permeablized with 0.1% Triton X-100. After blocking the cells with blocking solution (10% goat serum plus 1% immunoglobulin free bovine serum albumin in phosphate buffered saline), they were incubated with the primary antibody, rabbit anti-Caveolin-1 (dilution 1:250, BD Transduction Lab) at 37°C for 1 h and visualized with the secondary antibody, goat-anti rabbit IgG-Alexa Fluor 568 (dilution 1:400, Life Technologies). Cell nuclei were stained with NucBlue (Life Technologies). Images were captured using the Leica SP5 Confocal microscope with 63× objective. All images were obtained at same laser power, gain, and offset. Quantitation was done using ImageJ. Cell numbers were counted with “Particle analysis” while total fluorescence was determined with “Thresholding”.
Transmission Electron MicroscopyThe cells were fixed in 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer, embedded in 2% agarose, post-fixed in buffered 1% osmium tetroxide containing 0.08% potassium ferricyanide, en bloc stained in 4% uranyl acetate, dehydrated with a graded series of ethanol, and embedded in EMbed-812 resin. Thin sections were cut on a Leica Ultracut UCT ultramicrotome and stained with 2% uranyl acetate and lead citrate. Images were acquired on a FEI Tecnai G2 Spirit electron microscope equipped with a LaB6 source and operating at 120 kV. Quantitation of plasma membrane cell surface and number of caveolae/cell was done using the TraxEM2 plugin in FIJI (ImageJ). Images from 10 different fibroblasts from control subject and 13 from the patient were stitched and the cell perimeter measured on the montaged cell. Caveolae were counted on the montages at a magnification of 100K.
RESULTS
Whole exome sequencing revealed a heterozygous de novo variant (chr7:116,199,228C>T) in CAV1, c.424C>T (p.Q142*), in NLD 1500.4, the proband of one of the trios sequenced at UW–CMG. Sanger sequencing confirmed the presence of this mutation in the proband, but not in the parents and an unaffected sibling of the patient (Fig. 3). All variants identified in this individual are described in Supplementary Table SI. Variants passed a semi-automated review process ruling out sequencing artifacts and excluding known polymorphisms above 1% allele frequency for recessive variants (including compound heterozygote and X-linked dominant) and 0.1% for de novo/dominant variants. They were also filtered for events altering protein-coding sequence or potentially impacting transcript structure based on Ensembl Variant Effect Predictor annotation.
Exomesequencing of the NLD2, 800 trio was performed by Ambry Genetics. The bioinformatics analysis and filtering based on autosomal and X-linked dominant and autosomal recessive inheritance models revealed 23 genes (see Supplementary Table SII). Manual review to rule out sequencing artifacts and polymorphisms along with medical interpretation to rule out genes lacking clinical overlap with the patient’s phenotype resulted in nine genes, which included eight “clinically novel” genes. Of these, one heterozygous variant (chr7:116,199,282–116,199,283 del) in CAV1, c.479_480delTT (p. F160*) was further investigated via co-segregation analysis. Neither the parents nor the two unaffected siblings had this variant, thus this was identified as a de novo variant in CAV1. Sanger sequencing further confirmed the presence of this mutation only in the proband, but not in the parents and unaffected siblings (Fig. 3).
These two patients did not share any de novo or other compound heterozygous alterations in other genes besides the CAV1. The other trios revealed shared variants in only TTN and MUC16, for which variants are commonly observed in exome sequencing experiments. Exome sequencing as well as Sanger sequencing of the other four patients did not reveal any disease-causing variants in CAV1. In addition, we sequenced CAV1 by Sanger sequencing in eight additional patients with neonatal onset of lipodystrophy and progeroid features and did not find any disease-causing variants in any of them. Two patients had a heterozygous c.30+28C>T (rs35182456) variant and another one had a c.30 + 12_30 + 13insG (rs200963614) variant.
Immunofluorescence staining of the fibroblasts with antibody to the caveolin-1, revealed significantly reduced fluorescence in the patient’s cells compared to the control subject’s cells (Fig. 4). However, electron microscopy did not reveal any differences in the number of caveolae (mean 538 caveolae/mm in the control cells and 520 caveloae/mm in the patient’s cells) or the morphology of caveolae (Fig. 4).
DISCUSSION
Both the patients shared many but not all clinical features. Both had enlarged triangular head with marked, generalized loss of subcutaneous fat with preservation of subcutaneous fat in the buttocks and the palms and soles. While their linear growth was normal, body weight gain was markedly lagging. Both of them had sparse scalp hair and had thin skin with visible blood vessels underneath (cutis marmorata). They did not have any metabolic abnormalities such as glucose intolerance or hypertriglyceridemia. There is resemblance of the phenotype to Wiedemann–Rautenstrauch Syndrome (WRS) [Wiedemann 1992; Rautenstrauch et al., 1994], also known as neonatal progeroid syndrome, but the definition of this entity has become significantly blurred due to the many misdiagnoses and needs careful re-evaluation before the exact relationship with our patients becomes clear. Although, the triangular face of patient 2 may have some overlap with Silver-Russell Syndrome [Wakeling 2011], there were no other features such as growth restriction, clinodactyly, body asymmetry, or shortening of the limbs.
In view of similarities in the phenotype of these two patients with neonatal onset of generalized lipodystrophy, previous association of CAV1 heterozygous and homozygous variants with atypical partial lipodystrophy [Cao et al., 2008] and congenital generalized lipodystrophy (CGL), type 3 [Kim et al., 2008], respectively, and the low likelihood of chance occurrence of de novo CAV1 variants in two out of six kindreds in which exome sequencing was performed (P < 0.005, assuming equal mutational burden and uniform gene likelihoods), we consider these CAV1 variants to be most likely disease-causing.
Previously, CAV1 mutations have been reported in patients with atypical partial lipodystrophy, congenital generalized lipodystrophy, type 3, and pulmonary hypertension [Cao et al., 2008; Kim et al., 2008; Austin et al., 2012] (Fig. 5) (Table II). Cao et al. [2008] reported heterozygous c.400delA, p.I134Lfs*5 mutation in a 55-year-old father and his 28-year-old daughter of Northern European origin with onset of lipodystrophy affecting the face and upper body at birth [Berger et al., 2002]. They had increased fat deposition in the gluteal region, thighs, calves, and visceral region. The daughter had extreme hypertriglyceridemia with recurrent attacks of acute pancreatitis while the father had diabetes and extreme hypertriglyceridemia. Besides these features they had neurologic abnormalities including severe ataxia and neuropathy. Both of them also had congenital cataracts and atypical retinitis pigmentosa [Berger et al., 2002]. Interestingly, one of our patients (NLD 1500.3) also developed cataracts at a very early age. Another patient, a 35-year-old male had a c.-88delC mutation in the 5′ untranslated region and had loss of subcutaneous fat from the arms, gluteal region, thighs, and calves and increased visceral fat [Cao et al., 2008]. He had severe hypertriglyceridemia and recurrent episodes of acute pancreatitis. He had diabetes but no neurological deficits.
More recently, a heterozygous c.474delA (p.L159Sfs*22) variant in CAV1 was found in a family with multiple subjects affected with pulmonary arterial hypertension [Austin et al., 2012]. Interestingly, several family members without detectable pulmonary arterial hypertension also carried the c.474delA CAV1 mutation, suggesting incomplete penetrance. Another de novo CAV1 variant c.473delC (p.P158Hfs*23) was found in a child with pulmonary arterial hypertension [Austin et al., 2012]. There was no mention of lipodystrophy among these patients. Interestingly, one of our patients (NLD 2800.5) has documented pulmonary artery hypertension both by echocardiography, cardiac catheterization and on lung biopsy.
Finally, Kim et al. [2008] reported a 20-year-old female from Brazil with CGL with short stature and primary amenorrhea, who had a homozygous p.E38* mutation in CAV1. As a young adult, this patient had near complete absence of the subcutaneous, intrathoracic, and intra-abdominal fat. She also developed insulin resistance, acanthosis nigricans, hirsutism, diabetes mellitus, and hypertriglyceridemia during childhood and had marked hypoleptinemia and hypoadiponectinemia. Other distinctive clinical features included hypocalcemia and hypomagnesemia, which were attributed to vitamin D resistance. At 15 years of age, surgical correction of functional megaesophagus was undertaken. Her echocardiogram was normal and she had no evidence of cardiomyopathy or pulmonary disease. Interestingly, the parents and two siblings who had heterozygous p.E38* mutation did not have any evidence of lipodystrophy.
CAV1 is a major component of caveolae, which are specialized plasma membrane microdomains appearing as 50–100 nm vesicular invaginations [Stan 2005, Parton and Simons 2007], individually or in clusters, in adipocytes, endothelial cells, fibroblasts, and myocytes. CAV1 is expressed ubiquitously but with high expression in the adipocytes, endothelial cells, and fibroblasts [Razani and Lisanti 2001]. CAV1 encodes two isoforms of caveolin-1, α and β, using two alternate start sites [Scherer et al., 1995]. CAV1 has a transmembrane domain, a Tryptophan-Tryptophan-domain for interaction with other proteins and is palmitoylated at the cysteine residues at 133, 143, and 156 position in the carboxy-terminus for cholesterol binding and interaction with other caveolar components [Dietzen et al., 1995]. Both its amino- and carboxy-termini are cytoplasmic. Caveolins play an important role in vesicular trafficking, homeostasis of cellular cholesterol, fatty acids and triglycerides, and signal transduction. The Cav1−/− mice are viable and fertile but develop thick alveolar septa due to endothelium proliferation and fibrosis, pulmonary hypertension, right ventricular hypertrophy, cardiomyopathy, and increased susceptibility to tumorigenesis [Drab et al., 2001; Razani et al., 2001; Zhao et al., 2002; Le Lay and Kurzchalia 2005; Williams and Lisanti 2005]. Male Cav1−/− mice have hypercalciuria and urinary bladder stones [Cao et al., 2003]. The Cav1−/− mice also have reduced subcutaneous and intra-abdominal fat with underdeveloped perigonadal fat pads but not frank, generalized lipodystrophy [Razani et al., 2002]. Interestingly, brown adipose tissue is spared and undergoes hypertrophy [Razani et al., 2002]. These null mice also develop hypertriglyceridemia, hypoleptinemia, and hypoadiponectinemia [Razani et al., 2002]. The Cav1−/− mice are resistant to weight gain upon feeding a high fat diet and develop postprandial hyper-insulinemia and insulin resistance [Cohen et al., 2003], suggestive of partial lipodystrophy.
Although we observed negligible expression of CAV1 in the skin fibroblasts of patient NLD 2800.5, we did not find any abnormality in the number or morphology of caveolae on electron microscopy. It is likely that caveolin-1 has minimal role in the formation of caveolae in the fibroblasts. Whether adipocytes could reveal abnormal caveolae morphology in our patients remains unclear due to lack of availability of adipose tissue.
This report extends the spectrum of disorders due to CAV1 mutations to include one subtype of lipodystrophy. Our data further show that there are additional loci for neonatal onset lipodystrophy syndrome. How different mutations in CAV1 cause such heterogeneous phenotypes such as CGL, acquired generalized lipodystrophy, cataracts, pulmonary hypertension and neonatal onset lipodystrophy, remains unclear.
Supplementary Material
Sup Table 1
Sup Table 2
