INTRODUCTION
Mutated BRAF (canonically BRAFV600E) is found in ~50% of melanomas and results in constitutive activation of the mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling cascade, which comprises the RAF, MEK, and ERK kinases and thereby promotes proliferation. Oncogenic signaling by BRAFV600E can be blocked by FDA-approved inhibitors of RAF such as vemurafenib and dabrafenib or of MEK such as cobimetinib and trametinib. In patients, therapeutic responses to combined RAF and MEK inhibition therapy are often rapid and dramatic, but in most cases they are also transitory due to the emergence of drug-resistant clones (Groenendijk and Bernards, 2014). Emerging evidence suggests that rapid adaptation to targeted drugs by non-genetic mechanisms promotes sustained survival of persister cells, contributes to residual disease, and facilitates emergence of resistance mutations responsible for disease recurrence in patients (Pazarentzos and Bivona, 2015; Russo et al., 2019; Cipponi et al., 2020). However, the molecular mechanisms underlying drug adaptation, the emergence of persister cells, and selection for drug-resistant clones are only partially understood.
In melanoma cell lines, drug adaptation is observed soon after exposure to RAF/MEK inhibitors and gives rise to slowly dividing persister cells; this state is reversible following a drug holiday (Ramirez et al., 2016; Fallahi-Sichani et al., 2017; Shaffer et al., 2017; Paudel et al., 2018). Studies across a variety of cancer cell types and targeted therapies suggest that adaptive resistance is driven in part by signaling plasticity and changes in the activities of feedback mechanisms normally involved in regulating signaling cascades and receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs) (Carver et al., 2011; Niederst and Engelman, 2013; Goel et al., 2016). The role of negative feedback is particularly well established in the case of BRAFV600E cancers: when BRAFV600E signaling is inhibited by drugs, synthesis of dual activity serine-threonine phosphatases (DUSPs) and other negative regulators of the MAPK cascade falls. This makes cells more sensitive to MAPK reactivation, for example, by growth factors in the tumor microenvironment (Lito et al., 2012; Chandarlapaty, 2012; Prahallad et al., 2012).
Despite elegant studies by Rosen and others (Lito et al., 2012; Sun et al., 2014), the mechanisms of adaptive MAPK reactivation in drug-treated BRAFV600E melanoma cells remain unclear. Some reports suggest that ERK remains largely inhibited (Pratilas et al., 2009; Montero-Conde et al., 2013; Fallahi-Sichani et al., 2015), whereas others suggest that it rebounds (Lito et al., 2012). Components of the extracellular environment, including growth factors involved in autocrine/paracrine signaling, have also been shown to promote resistance (Straussman et al., 2012; Wilson et al., 2012), but how mitogenic signals are transduced is unknown: similar to many other types of mammalian cells, melanocytes require MAPK activity to divide. Thus, a fundamental mystery of the persister state is how BRAFV600E melanomas can survive and proliferate when RAF and MEK inhibitors profoundly block MAPK signaling.
Here, we study the drug-adapted state of BRAFV600E melanoma cells using live- and fixed-cell imaging combined with proteomics and mathematical modeling. We find that drug-induced rewiring of the MAPK cascade causes BRAFV600E cells to experience sporadic ERK pulses of sufficient duration (~60–90 min) to promote cell survival and division. ERK pulses are triggered locally by factors in the microenvironment, likely released by neighboring cells. Thus, ERK is profoundly inhibited on average but briefly active in patches of cells, explaining the infrequent division characteristic of the drug-adapted state. A computational model shows that drug exposure mediates a shift between two configurations of the MAPK signaling cascade: from one driven by BRAFV600E that is drug sensitive to a second driven by receptors, Ras-GTP, and RAF dimers that is highly resistant to both RAF and MEK inhibitors. Moreover, accumulation of DNA damage and upregulation of error-prone polymerases (Russo et al., 2019) suggests a mechanism by which persister cells can acquire resistant mutations.
RESULTS
ERK Is Reactivated in a Subset of BRAFV600E Melanoma Cells Treated with RAF and MEK InhibitorsConsistent with previous data (Lito et al., 2012), treatment of BRAFV600E A375 melanoma cells with vemurafenib at clinically relevant concentrations (1μM) strongly suppressed the average activity of the MAPK cascade within 20 min, followed by a small rebound to ~5% of its initial level over the following 10 h (Figure 1A). When pERK levels were quantified in single cells by immunofluorescence imaging using antibodies against activating sites on ERK1T202,Y204 and ERK2T185,Y187 (hereafter pERK) (Figure 1A) we observed the rapid emergence (by t = 2 h) of a long-tailed distribution of pERK levels with 1%–5% of cells having pERK levels similar to those of drug-naive A375 cells. A similar phenomenon was observed in five A375 cultures that had been subjected to single-cell cloning (Figures 1B and S1A). Thus, pERK-high cells are unlikely to represent rare drug-resistant mutants. The same phenomenon was observed when cultures were treated with MEK inhibitors at clinically relevant concentrations (~10 nM; Figure 1C). However, at saturating drug concentrations (100-fold higher; ≥ 1 μM trametinib) pERK-high cells were absent, demonstrating a requirement for MEK activity (we explain below why MEK inhibitors inhibit signaling in all cells only at very high doses). When A375 cells were imaged following treatment with any of four RAF or MEK inhibitors at clinically relevant concentrations, high pERK staining was observed to occur in patches of neighboring cells (Figure 1D). Thus, the previously described phenomenon of MAPK rebound in drug-adapted BRAF-mutant melanoma appears to be caused by pERK reactivation in rare cells found in clusters.
ERK Pulses Spontaneously Arise in Neighboring Drug-Adapted BRAFV600E Melanoma CellsTo study ERK dynamics in single A375 cells, we transfected them with the fluorescence ERK-KTR:CFP activity reporter (Regot et al., 2014; Fallahi-Sichani et al., 2017) as well as geminin:RFP to score cell-cycle stage and H2B:YFP to facilitate tracking. The ERK-KTR:CFP reporter translocates from the nucleus to the cytosol when phosphorylated by ERK, providing time-resolved, single-cell data on kinase activity (Figure 1E, upper left panel). When reporter-expressing cells were exposed to 1-μM vemurafenib for 24 h and imaged every 6 min over a period of 16 h (N = 861 cells), ERK activity was profoundly inhibited, in agreement with fixed-cell data. However, cells sporadically underwent brief bursts of ERK reactivation at irregular intervals (see exemplary trajectories; Figure 1E, bottom panel). ERK pulses had a characteristic amplitude and duration: drug-inhibited ERK activity rose rapidly to a maximum level similar to that of untreated cells and then fell gradually to baseline within 60–90 min (Figure 1F). Over a 16-h period ~16% of cells (n = 134) exhibited a single ERK pulse and ~7% (n = 57) exhibited multiple pulses (Figure 1G). Thus, while fixed-cell imaging shows that only a small fraction of drug-treated A375 cells are pERK high at a specific point in time, live-cell imaging shows that this is true because of brief but frequent ERK pulses throughout the population (Figure 1H).Live-cell movies also showed that neighboring cells often experienced a synchronous ERK pulse (88% of pulses, N = 43; Figure 1I). In other cases (12%), ERK pulsed in an alternating manner between neighboring cells, a behavior suggestive of a sender-receiver relationship (Figure 1K). Most ERK pulses involved five or fewer neighboring cells (44%), but some clusters involved more than 25 cells (11%) (Figure 1I). Nearby lysis of a dying cell was commonly observed in conjunction with a pulse (32%), as was contact of a dead cell body with a living cell (23%). In these cases, we often observed a wave of ERK activity (see images with magnified view, yellow boxes in Figure 1J). Within the largest pulses, which could involve up to 80 cells, ERK activity appeared to propagate over successive movie frames from a point of origin toward distant cells, taking up to ~20 min to reach to the furthest cells (Figure 1J; Video S1). Not all cells in such a wave of ERK pulses were in physical contact, suggesting a role for factors that diffuse into the media (see Figure 1J). We conclude that pulsatile reactivation of ERK occurs spontaneously in drug-adapted A375 cells and that spatiotemporal patterns are consistent with the autocrine-paracrine signaling previously implicated in regeneration of skin and other tissues (Hiratsuka et al., 2015).
ERK Pulses Enable Survival and Escape from Cell-Cycle Arrest of Drug-Adapted BRAFV600E Melanoma CellsTo study the role of ERK pulses in cell survival and proliferation, reporter-expressing A375 cells were exposed to 1-μM vemurafenib and then imaged every 20 min for 4 days, starting 1 day after drug addition. Net cell number was constant over this period of time (Paudel et al., 2018), but data from >100 tracked cells revealed diverse outcomes at the single-cell level (Figure 2A). After 24-h drug treatment, geminin levels were low in most cells as a result of G0/G1 arrest, but over a 4-day period ~15% of cells died and ~30% divided once. Cells that managed to enter S phase progressed to mitosis only slightly more slowly (16 h) than untreated cells (12 h; Figure 2A) confirming that MAPK suppression primarily caused G0/G1 arrest. Among cells that divided in the presence of 1-μM vemurafenib (N = 35), 80% were observed to experience at least one ERK pulse (average 3.2 pulses; Figure 2B); in some cells as many as 9 pulses were observed prior to a division (Figure 2C; Videos S2 and S3). Among cells exposed to 1-μM vemurafenib plus a saturating concentration of cobimetinib (1μM), ERK pulsing was fully suppressed and 35% of cells died; only 3% divided (Figure 2A). We conclude that pulsatile ERK activity is associated with slow proliferation and survival under drug treatment but that not every pulse results in cell division: as shown previously, the relationship between ERK pulsing and cell division is probabilistic (Albeck et al., 2013).When A375 cells were exposed to vemurafenib (1μM) and cobimetinib for 1 to 4 days over a 100-fold concentration range (0.01–1μM) and assayed by fixed-cell microscopy, the fraction of pERK-high cells fell 10 to 1,000-fold compared with DMSO-treated cells. Over a range of cobimetinib doses and times of exposure, the reduction in the number of S-phase cells (monitored using EdU pulse-labeling) closely paralleled the reduction in pERK-high cells (Figure 2D). Similar results were obtained in seven other BRAF-mutant melanoma lines. In the presence of 1-μM vemurafenib, depending on the line, 0.1% to 10% of cells were pERK high, cell number remained roughly constant over a 4-day period, and the addition of cobimetinib eliminated pERK-high cells and caused net cell loss (Figures 2E and S1B). These data suggest that in multiple cell lines representing a range of sensitivities to RAF inhibitors, cells escaping cell-cycle arrest experience ERK pulses; conversely, inhibiting ERK pulsing suppresses cell division and increases cell death to a similar degree (Figure 2F).
Multiple Receptors Promote ERK Pulsing in Drug-Adapted BRAFV600E Melanoma CellsThe spatiotemporal pattern of ERK pulses in live-cell movies is suggestive of paracrine/autocrine signaling mediated by transmembrane receptors. To investigate the role of RTKs in generating spontaneous ERK pulses, we treated vemurafenib-adapted A375 cells (1μM, 36 h) with inhibitors of the EGFR/ERBB receptors (lapatinib or poziotinib), FGFR (infingratinib), or AXL (R428) at 1μM; alternatively cells were treated with a SHP2 phosphatase inhibitor (SHP099, 5μM) or pan-RAF inhibitor (LY3009120 at 1μM) for 2 h. Pan-RAF inhibitors are active against BRAF/CRAF homo- and heterodimers downstream of active RTKs, whereas vemurafenib and dabrafenib inhibit only BRAFV600E monomers. In this experiment, a saturating concentration of cobimetinib served as a positive control for full inhibition of pulsing (Figure 3A). We found that inhibition of RTKs and of SHP2 partially blocked pulsing, as evidenced by a change in the distribution of pERK-high cells. Combinations of drugs were generally more active than single agents. Pan-RAF inhibitors inhibited pulsing over multiple days of drug exposure whereas SHP099 acted transiently (Figure 3B), but neither was as effective as 1-μM cobimetinib (Figures 3A and S1C). We conclude that ERK pulsing is mediated by RAF dimers, MEK and, to a lesser extent, by SHP2 and that these lie downstream of multiple RTKs (Figure 3C).Quantitative ELISA and immunofluorescence imaging showed that ERBB, cMet, and AXL receptors were present on vemurafenib-adapted A375 cells (1μM, 24 h) at 102–104 copies per cell, a low level as compared with abundances in colorectal or breast cancer cells (Figure 3D). To show directly that these receptors activate immediate-early signal transduction in adapted cells, A375 cells were treated with vemurafenib (1μM, 24 h) and then with growth factors EGF, NRG1, FGF8, or HGF (100 ng/mL). Phosphorylation of downstream signaling proteins was monitored by immunofluorescence. We observed that all cells in the population underwent rapid and transient phosphorylation of a kinase cascade comprising pMEK, pERK, p90RSKT359, pS6S240/244, and pS6S235/236 (Figures 3E, S2A and S2B). RNA-seq of these cells showed that ~80 genes were upregulated 3-fold or more including immediate-early response genes, such as EGR1 and FOSL1, and feedback regulators, such as DUSP4/6 and SPRY2/4 (Figures 3K and S2C). Immediate-early genes peaked 1–2 h after ligand addition and genes promoting G1 to S transition, such as CCND1 (cyclin D) and E2F1/2, peaked between 2 and 8 h. From these data we conclude that despite the low abundance of RTKs, exposure of drug-adapted cells to one of several different growth factors induces a synchronous ERK pulse across a population of cells as well as transient expression of mitogenic genes; the amplitude and dynamics of this ERK pulse resemble spontaneous pulses in single cells.
Low Receptor Abundances Limit the Duration of ERK Pulses and Diversify Responsiveness to LigandBased on current understanding of receptor signaling, we hypothesized that the expression of RTKs at low levels in melanoma cell lines served to limit the duration of ligand-induced ERK reactivation (Resat et al., 2003). Consistent with this, EGF was internalized into endosomes in A375 cells within 15 min of EGF addition and overall receptor levels fell 3-fold within 24 h (Figure S2D). When CRISPRa was used to overexpress EGFR by ~5–8-fold (Figure S2E and S2F), the addition of EGF to vemurafenib-adapted cells (1μM, 24 h) caused sustained rather than transient ERK activation (Figure 3G). Moreover, a substantial fraction of receptor remained at the plasma membrane following ligand addition (Figure 3H) and cells were ~100-fold more sensitive to EGF than parental cells, with ERK activation observed at concentration of EGF as low as 0.01 ng/mL (1 pM; Figure 3I). Imaging showed that at low EGF doses, pERK was activated in all EGFR-overexpressing cells but only a subset of parental cells. Thus, differences in EGFR expression levels, whether engineered by CRISPRa or naturally occurring (receptor levels are log-normally distributed in parental cells; Figure 3J) can alter the sensitivity of cells to growth factors. Receptors levels are often correlated among neighboring cells (Shaffer et al., 2017) (Figure 3D), and this may explain why pulsing occurs in patches. Low receptor levels, and efficient internalization from the cell surface, likely explain why pulses are transient.
Proteomics Reveals Relief of Negative Feedback on Receptor Signaling in Drug-Adapted Melanoma CellsTo quantify the effects of MAPK inhibition on feedback regulators, we performed quantitative targeted mass spectrometry and RNA-seq on A375 cells treated for 24 h with four doses of vemurafenib (from 0.01 to 1μM). This allowed us to determine the absolute abundances, phosphorylation states, and transcript levels of 21 proteins or genes in the MAPK pathway at different levels of ERK inhibition (Figures 4A–4D; see Table S1). In untreated A375 cells ~20%–30% of total ERK1 and ERK2 was phosphorylated on T202/Y204 and T185/Y187; this fell to 2%–3% phosphorylation in cells treated with 1-μM vemurafenib (Figure 4D). The abundances of six proteins, including the EGF receptor, SPRY2/4, the ERBB inhibitor MIG6, and DUSP4/6 fell by 2.5- to 35-fold with vemurafenib exposure; other protein levels were unchanged (Figure 4B). RNA-seq data showed that genes for these six proteins were also downregulated at the transcript level (Pratilas et al., 2009) (Figure 4C). Analyzing stoichiometric ratios of interacting proteins provided additional insight into feedback regulation (Figure S3A). For example, when MAPK signaling was fully active (in the absence of vemurafenib) SPRY2 and SPRY4 were in 6-fold stoichiometric excess to GRB2, but in cells exposed to 1-μM vemurafenib for 24 h, GRB2 was in 5-fold excess to SPRY2/4 (Figures 4B and S3A). SPRY2 competitively inhibits recruitment of the RAS guanine nucleotide exchange factor SOS1 to GRB2 (Lao et al., 2006), and observed protein levels in A375 cells are therefore precisely in the range needed to modulate RTK signaling via RAS. A substantial change in stoichiometry (from ~1:10 to 1:100) was also observed for the DUSP4/6 phosphatases relative to their ERK1/2 targets (Figures 4B and S3A). Finally, the phosphorylation of SOS1 on S1134, which reduces SOS1 activity and SOS1-GRB2 association (Saha et al., 2012), fell from 100% to 20% of total protein following vemurafenib exposure (Figure 4D). These data show that multiple proteins involved in negative regulation of receptor and MAPK signaling fall in direct proportion to the degree of MAPK inhibition (Lito et al., 2012). However, even when ERK is largely inhibited (at 1-μM vemurafenib), phosphorylation of EGFR, CBL, GRB2, and SHP2 remains low (<5% of total protein) (Figure 4D). Thus, drug-induced relief of negative feedback prepares melanoma cells for RTK activation but is insufficient for strong ERK activation in absence of exogenous growth factors.
Receptor-Mediated Signaling in Drug-Adapted Cells Is Resistant to RAF and MEK InhibitorsTo quantify the effects of growth factors on drug-adapted cells, we pre-treated them for 24 h with RAF inhibitors across a 104-fold concentration range, added various growth factors and then measured pERK and pMEK levels by immunofluorescence 5 min later (the peak of the synchronized pulse in the cell population). We found that the inducibility of pERK and pMEK (red and orange lines, Figure 4E) correlated directly with the degree of pre-treatment ERK inhibition (black lines, Figure 4E). ERK was transiently activated to a level above its resting (BRAFV600E-driven) level in drug-naive A375 cells by all four growth factors tested (Figures 4F and 4G).Since MEK kinases lie downstream of both oncogenic BRAFV600E and receptor-mediated RAF signaling, MEK inhibitors should, in principle, block both receptor-driven and BRAFV600E-driven signaling with similar efficacy. However, in cells incubated with MEK inhibitors for 24 h and exposed to EGF for 5 min, a 100-fold higher drug concentration was needed to inhibit pERK (IC50 ~250 nM for cobimetinib and 50 nM for trametinib) than in the absence of ligand stimulation (IC50 ~2 nM and 0.5 nM respectively). Moreover, across a 104 range of MEK inhibitor concentrations, EGF-induced pERK levels rose to a level above those in drug-naive cells and then fell to background levels, giving rise to a biphasic dose-response curve. Full suppression of pERK was observed only at MEK inhibitor doses >100-fold above clinically relevant concentrations (~1μM; Figure 4H). A similar biphasic response of pERK to cobimetinib was observed using three other growth factors (Figures 4I and 4J). Thus, RTK-mediated ERK activation is much more resistant to MEK inhibition than BRAFV600E oncogenic signaling.We also observed that, in the absence of added ligands or vemurafenib pre-treatment, MEK inhibitors were potent in reducing pMEK levels (IC50 ~6 nM for cobimetinib and 0.9 nM for trametinib). This is surprising because protein kinase inhibitors usually act by blocking the ability of kinases to phosphorylate downstream substrates, in this case ERK, and not by blocking phosphorylation of the kinase being inhibited (i.e., MEK). We speculate that MEK inhibitors, which act allosterically and bind outside of the kinase active site, disrupt BRAFV600E interaction with MEK (Figure 4H). Strikingly, the same MEK inhibitors did not block MEK phosphorylation mediated by growth factors (Figure 4H). To better understand the mechanisms responsible for these and other data we turned to a mechanistic computational model that recapitulates key properties of the MAPK pathway.
Construction of a Computational Model of Oncogenic and Receptor-Driven MAPK Signaling in the Presence of RAF and MEK InhibitorsTo study mechanisms of ERK pulsing during RAF and MEK inhibition in silico, we constructed a mass-action biochemical model of MAPK signaling (melanoma adaptive resistance model; MARM1) using the rule-based PySB framework (Lopez et al., 2013) incorporating diverse structural, biochemical, pharmacological, and cell-level data. MARM1 extends previously published MAPK models (Kholodenko, 2015; Rauch et al., 2016; Rukhlenko et al., 2018) using an energy-based formulation that better describes cooperativity in protein-protein and protein-drug interactions (Lopez et al., 2013; Sekar et al., 2017) (see Data S1). The model includes (1) growth-factor-dependent activation of RTKs that are then internalized and degraded (Figures 3G and 3H), (2) negative feedback mediated by SOS1, SPRY2/4, and DUSP4/6 (as described above; Figure 4A), (3) formation of active hetero- and homo-CRAF/BRAF dimers by Ras-GTP binding, downstream of activated RTKs (Freeman et al., 2013), (4) lower affinity of RAF inhibitors for CRAF/BRAF dimers than BRAFV600 monomers (Yao et al., 2015; Kholodenko, 2015; Rukhlenko et al., 2018), (5) efficient phosphorylation of MEK by RAF dimers but not by BRAFV600E when MEK is bound to an allosteric MEK inhibitor (Lito et al., 2014), and (6) a lower affinity of MEK inhibitors for phosphorylated versus unphosphorylated MEK (Hatzivassiliou et al., 2013). The resulting model has 11 protein components (shown in Figure 5A) and 1,7 ordinary differential equations with 70 kinetic parameters. Strikingly, the core MAPK cascade comprising just RAS, BRAFV600E, CRAF, MEK, and ERK, bound and unbound to inhibitory drugs involved over 200 distinct protein complexes differing in biochemical activity and drug-binding properties, highlighting the need for a systematic analysis of the configurations in which MAPK signaling operates in melanoma cells. Initial conditions and kinetic rates were estimated from mass spectrometry data and time course or dose-response data on pMEK and pERK signaling in the presence of absence of RAF and MEK inhibitors (Figures 5B–D, S4A, and S4B). The model precisely recapitulated time- and dose-responses of BRAF-mutant melanoma cells treated with RAF or MEK inhibitors and EGF ligand (Figures 5B and 5C), demonstrating that molecular mechanisms included in the model were sufficient to explain the experimental data.
Computational Modeling Shows that RAF and MEK Complexes Assembled by Transient Receptor Signaling Are Less Inhibitable by Drugs than the Analog Complexes in the Oncogenic ConfigurationAnalysis of the model helped to elucidate the molecular mechanisms underpinning the ability of activated receptors to induce ERK signaling during RAF or MEK inhibition. The MARM1 model indicated the possible simultaneous existence of two relatively distinct MAPK configurations, an oncogenic configuration driven by monomeric BRAFV600E and a “physiological” configuration driven by RTKs and involving RAS-GTP and BRAF/CRAF dimers. Parameter estimation and simulations confirmed that whereas BRAFV600E monomers had a high affinity for vemurafenib and similar drugs, only one protomer in a B/CRAF dimer bound drug avidly making dimers drug resistant (Figure 5Dii). Oncogenic signaling promoted synthesis of negative regulators, such as DUSPs and SPRY proteins, but many of these act upstream of BRAF, making negative feedback more effective against the physiological than oncogenic configuration. When BRAFV600E was inhibited, negative regulation was relieved, placing the physiological configuration in a latent state that could be activated by ligand. Only when ligands were present did RTKs dimerize, recruit GRB2:SOS1 and generate RAS-GTP (Figure 5C). Binding of RAS-GTP to B/CRAF increased hetero-/homodimerization affinity by 104-fold (relative to the basal affinity of unbound RAFs; Figure 5Di). A concomitant fall in DUSP levels allowed for twice as much pERK than in the oncogenic signaling state, even at similar pMEK levels (Figure 5B), explaining the potentiation of ERK signaling by receptors. The estimated half-lives of SPRY and DUSP proteins also explained why ~2 h are required for negative feedback to decay and cells to become fully sensitive to growth factors (Figures 5C and 5Dvi). A decrease in the half-life of RTKs in the plasma membrane from ~10 h to ~5 min upon activation by ligands explained rapid pulse termination by receptor internalization and degradation (Figures 5C and 5Dvi).Additional experiments showed that when the physiological MAPK configuration was induced with EGF and one of three RAF inhibitors added, pERK and pMEK levels (which are driven by receptor signaling under these conditions) rose monotonically as a result of relief of negative feedback (Figure 5E). The calibrated model recapitulated this finding (the net contribution from activated receptors was estimated in this case by subtracting pMEK and pERK levels in unstimulated cells from the corresponding signals in EGF stimulated cells; see STAR Methods). When the data were normalized to drug affinity (as determined by IC50 values in vitro) the three RAF inhibitors behaved similarly (Figure 5E). When any one of five MEK inhibitors were used, the receptor-driven contribution to pERK levels exhibited a bell-shaped dose-response curve (Figures 5F, S3B, and S3C). Modeling showed that, at clinically relevant drug concentrations, MEK inhibitors were similar to RAF inhibitors in blocking oncogenic signaling, relieving negative feedback and allowing potent receptor-driven signaling. However, when growth factors were present, inhibition of physiological signaling required 100-fold more MEK inhibitor (Figure 5F). Two molecular mechanisms were responsible for this differential sensitivity to drug in the model: (1) inhibition of MEK phosphorylation by BRAFV600E occurred near the drug IC50, but MEK phosphorylation by BRAF/CRAF dimers was not affected because RAF dimers can phosphorylate MEK even when it is bound by MEK inhibitors, presumably due to the different stereochemistry of the underlying complexes (Hatzivassiliou et al., 2013; Lito et al., 2014) (Figures 5Div and 5Dv); (2) once MEK is phosphorylated, its affinity for MEK inhibitors falls ~10-fold, resulting in less potent inhibition of ERK phosphorylation, as estimated by model parameters (Figure 5Diii). Thus, modeling shows that a large pool of pMEK is generated by growth-factor-bound RTKs via the physiological MAPK configuration, and this pool is fully drug-bound only when MEK inhibitors are used at ~1μM; thus, it is only at these clinically inaccessible concentrations that ERK pulsing is fully blocked (Figures 5B and 5F). Modeling therefore provides a precise mechanistic explanation for the resistance of the receptor-driven physiological MAPK configuration, relative to the oncogenic configuration, to both RAF and MEK inhibitors.
RTK-Mediated ERK Pulsing Can Occur over a Wide Range of Combined RAF and MEK Inhibitor ConcentrationsTo test the predictive capabilities of the MARM1 model trained against single-agent dose-response data, we predicted the resistance of receptor-driven ERK signaling to combined RAF and MEK inhibition (Figure 5G). When we simulated the effects of adapting cells to different concentrations of cobimetinib plus 1-μM vemurafenib (for 24 h) and then exposing them to EGF for 5 min, we predicted that (1) pMEK levels would increase ~10-fold above baseline levels and be insensitive to inhibition by increasing cobimetinib concentrations and (2) the IC50 for pERK inhibition would be >100-fold higher than for oncogenic signaling (increasing from ~2 to 300 nM; Figure 5G). Experiments confirmed these predictions, which could be recapitulated with three growth factors other than EGF (Figure 5G) and with trametinib plus dabrafenib (Figure S3D). We conclude that MEK phosphorylation in the presence of any one of several different growth factors is a mechanism of resistance to MEK and RAF inhibitors in combination. We then used the model to simulate isobolograms for the oncogenic MAPK configuration, the receptor-driven configuration, and their joint total pERK control (Figures 5H and S4C). Experimental data were collected under the same conditions in the presence and absence of vemurafenib and EGF and corresponding isobolograms then computed (see STAR Methods for details). Both experiments and simulations showed that oncogenic signaling (which predominates at point “1” in the isobologram; Figure 5H) was inhibited by MEK and RAF inhibitors acting in a roughly additive manner at doses well below the clinically accessible ranges (gray bars). In contrast, RTK-driven MAPK signaling induced by ligand addition was highly resistant to RAF/MEK inhibitors used in combination (point “2”; Figure 5H) and only at the highest, clinically inaccessible doses did MEK inhibitors behave as single-agent antagonists of pERK (point “3”). Thus, RTK-mediated ERK reactivation—which experiments show is pulsatile—can occur over a wide range of combined RAF and MEK inhibitor concentrations.
ERK Pulses Can Be Observed In Vivo in Mouse XenograftsTo determine if ERK pulses occur in in vivo, A375 xenografts were grown in nude mice and both fixed- and live-cell imaging performed. For fixed-cell imaging mice were treated for 5 days with dabrafenib (25 mg/kg q.d.) plus trametinib (2.5 mg/kg q.d.), and tumors were recovered, formaldehyde fixed and paraffin embedded (FFPE), and subjected to immunofluorescence imaging (Lin et al., 2018). Single cells were identified by segmentation using nuclear staining; pERK was quantified in the nucleus and surrounding cytoplasm (n > 104 cells; 3–4 animals per condition, Figure S5A). We observed that pERK levels were substantially reduced in the great majority of tumor cells from animals treated with dabrafenib plus trametinib but that clusters of pERK-high cells were still present, and these were found in clusters similar in size to those found in drug-adapted cell cultures (Figures 6A and S5A–S5C).To study ERK dynamics, we performed intravital imaging of A375 tumors expressing the ERK-KTR and geminin reporters. Movies of ~4 h in duration and having a sampling interval of ~6.5 min were recorded from three mice that had been exposed to dabrafenib plus trametinib (for 2 days) and also from control animals. Once again, ERK was largely inhibited under drug treatment but we observed multiple examples of pulsatile ERK reactivation in small clusters of cells (1–3 cells) (Figure 6B and Video S4 for two examples). Some cells also underwent division (Figure S5D). These findings are consistent with the idea that sporadic ERK pulses and slow cell proliferation occur in xenografted melanoma tumors in which oncogenic BRAFV600E-driven ERK signal has been inhibited by a RAF plus a MEK inhibitor.
A Possible Connection between the Drug-Adapted Persister State and Replication StressIt has recently been shown that treatment of BRAFV600E colorectal cancer cells with MAPK inhibitors induces a mutagenic state that may facilitate acquisition of drug-resistance mutations (Russo et al., 2019). When we analyzed gene expression in A375 cells treated with vemurafenib for 24 h, we identified a gene expression signature similar to the one described by Russo et al. It includes the dose-dependent downregulation of genes involved in DNA repair and upregulation of error-prone DNA polymerases (Figure 6C). In drug-adapted cells (1-μM vemurafenib; 96 h) we observed that ~5% of cells were synthesizing DNA (as measured by EdU incorporation) and that most of these cells stained positive for diffuse γ-H2AX, a marker of replication stress (Figure 6D). Thus, slowly dividing drug-adapted melanoma cells appear to have the properties of the mutation-prone persister state—replication stress and upregulation of error-prone polymerases—previously observed in colorectal cancer cells (Russo et al., 2019).
DISCUSSION
In this paper we show that BRAFV600E melanoma cells exposed to RAF and MEK inhibitors experience sporadic pulses of high ERK activity that are sufficient to promote cell survival and division, thereby generating slowly dividing, drug-adapted “persister” cells (this state is also known as adaptive or non-genetic drug resistance). In xenografted tumors treated with RAF/MEK inhibitors, clusters of pERK-high cells are evident by histology, and intravital imaging reveals pulsatile ERK activation. Further work will be required to show that the underlying mechanisms and consequences of pulsing are similar in cultured cells and tumors, but our data strongly suggest that the rebound in ERK activity previously observed in pre-clinical studies and patient samples (Lito et al., 2012) involves sporadic, strong pulses of ERK activity in single cells rather than a low level of sustained ERK reactivation. The sensitivity of ERK pulsing to RTK inhibition, the occurrence of pulsing in local patches of cells, and wave-like propagation of pulses suggest the involvement of paracrine/autocrine signaling (Figure 7A).
In the drug-adapted state, which can persist for weeks in culture (Fallahi-Sichani et al., 2017; Paudel et al., 2018; Shaffer et al., 2017; Yang et al., 2020), sustained ERK pulsing drives slow proliferation. However, viable cell number remains approximately constant because the number of newly born cells balances the number of dying cells. We find that, under these conditions, dividing cells experience replication stress and express the error-prone polymerases previously proposed to facilitate emergence of clones carrying resistance mutations (Russo et al., 2019; Cipponi et al., 2020). Thus, continued survival and division of persister cells may promote genetically encoded resistance in melanoma, but direct measurement of mutation frequency will be required to test this hypothesis.
Receptor-Driven Pulses and Chronic BRAFV600E Signaling Involve Distinct MAPK Configurations with Different Sensitivity to RAF and MEK InhibitorsExperiments and computational modeling show that ERK pulsing is possible because MAPK signaling in BRAFV60OE cells can operate in two distinct configurations (Figure 7B). The oncogenic configuration driven by BRAFV600E monomers chronically activates ERK and is highly sensitive to RAF and MEK inhibitors. When the oncogenic configuration is inhibited, negative feedback on receptors is relieved. This enables a switch to a second latent “physiological” configuration involving RTKs, downstream Ras-GTP and BRAF/CRAF dimers. This configuration is responsive to factors in the local microenvironment and is resistant to both RAF and MEK inhibitors. As a result, these drugs potentiate MAPK signaling driven by transmembrane receptors under conditions in which the drugs block oncogenic signaling. Given the dependency of BRAF-mutant melanomas on MAPK activity (Long et al., 2014), it seems likely that the presence of the latent physiological configuration represents a key limitation in RAF/MEK therapy. It might therefore seem logical to target growth factors to improve therapeutic response. However, multiple receptors (e.g., ERBB1/2, c-MET, and FGFR) (Straussman et al., 2012; Wilson et al., 2012) are individually capable of inducing ERK pulsing when cognate ligands are present. This likely explains why blocking RTKs with selective drugs has not proven broadly effective in overcoming drug resistance in melanoma (Ahmed and Haass, 2018).Although RTK-driven ERK pulsing promotes persistence, pulsing is insufficient for rapid growth of BRAFV600E tumors: otherwise, RAF/MEK inhibitors would not be effective as anticancer drugs. This contrast with EGFR signaling in colorectal cancer, which can be targeted therapeutically (e.g., with cetuximab) and which is a primary contributor to RAF inhibitors resistance (combined inhibition of BRAF and EGFR is an FDA-approved therapy for BRAFV600E colorectal cancers [Kopetz et al., 2019; Prahallad et al., 2012]). We propose that persistence in drug-adapted melanoma cells and primary resistance in cancers expressing abundant RTKs (e.g., EGFR in colorectal cancers) differ primarily in the duration of ERK activation: sporadic pulsing is sufficient for persistence but chronic or frequent signaling is necessary for tumor growth.In our studies, spontaneous ERK pulses likely arise from localized release of growth factors enhanced by non-uniform distribution of RTKs at a single-cell level (Shaffer et al., 2017; Spencer et al., 2009). Once RTKs bind ligand, receptors are efficiently endocytosed and either degraded or recycled, terminating signaling and setting up the MAPK cascade for a subsequent pulse. These pulses superficially resemble the waves of MAPK activity that maintain tissue homeostasis in normal skin (Hiratsuka et al., 2015; Muta et al., 2019; Hiratsuka et al., 2020). Heterogeneous expression of EGFR and AXL has also been associated with drug resistance in patients (Tirosh et al., 2016; Shaffer et al., 2017). Live-cell movies suggest that dying cells are another likely source of autocrine/paracrine signals, possibly including presentation of the AXL ligand Gas6 in the context of phosphatidylserine lipids (Müller et al., 2014). When induced by exogenous ligand addition, an ERK pulse is sufficient to induce expression of genes necessary for cell-cycle progression such as cyclin D (Zwang et al., 2011). However, the relationship between pulsing and cell division in single cells is probabilistic, and it remains unknown why multiple pulses precede division in some cells but not others (Albeck et al., 2013; Aoki et al., 2013). It seems likely that other signaling cascades downstream of receptors might contribute to the decision to divide (e.g., those involving JNK or AKT) (Fallahi-Sichani et al., 2015; Yang et al., 2020).
Lower Potency of RAF and MEK Inhibitors for Receptor Signaling Enables Adaptive Resistance but Might Be Their Saving Grace with Respect to TolerabilityA key rationale for combining MEK inhibitors with RAF inhibitors is to prevent all forms of MAPK reactivation (Chapman et al., 2014). However, we find that MEK inhibitors such as trametinib and cobimetinib are unexpectedly ~50- to 100-fold less potent on receptor-mediated MAPK signaling than on oncogenic signaling, making them unable to inhibit ERK pulsing at clinically accessible doses. Our computational model shows that multiple biochemical mechanisms, including the resistance of RAF dimers downstream of RTKs to RAF inhibitors, the ability of MEK inhibitors to block MEK phosphorylation by monomeric BRAFV600E, but not dimeric RAF, and the higher affinity of MEK inhibitors for unphosphorylated MEK are all involved in creating a wide dose range over which combined RAF and MEK inhibitors suppress oncogenic signaling but potentiate receptor-driven ERK pulsing (the physiological configuration in Figure 7B).Could new drugs or drug combinations be deployed to block pulsatile MAPK signaling and the emergence of persister cells? Drugs able to inhibit the physiological and oncogenic MAPK configurations with similar potency, such as pan-RAF inhibitors (Peng et al., 2015) or MEK inhibitors blocking MEK phosphorylation by RAF dimers, are a possibility. However, we speculate that the resistance of physiological MAPK signaling to both RAF and MEK inhibitors might explain why these drugs spare normal cells and are well tolerated in patients (Chapman et al., 2011; Flaherty et al., 2012). The Achilles heel of RAF and MEK inhibitors with respect to adaptive resistance might therefore be their saving grace with respect to tolerability. If so, the key to more durable therapy lies not in deeper inhibition of the core MAPK cascade, which might be toxic to non-transformed cells, but rather the identification of vulnerabilities specific to the persister state. This will benefit from better understanding of this state (Shaffer et al., 2017) and whether persister cells have recurrent features or vulnerabilities that can be targeted therapeutically (Schuh et al., 2020). These might include proteins downstream of multiple growth factor receptors (e.g., SHP2) (Chen et al., 2016), accumulation of DNA damage (Margue et al., 2019), or dependence on specific survival pathways (Coppé et al., 2019; Fallahi-Sichani et al., 2015; Hangauer et al., 2017).
Limitations of StudyThis study focuses on a single, widely studied melanoma cell line (A375) that is well suited to long-term live-cell imaging and efficiently forms xenografts. We find evidence of rare, sporadic MAPK reactivation in seven additional BRAF-mutant melanoma cell lines treated with RAF and MEK inhibitors but have not yet performed live-cell imaging to prove that this involves ERK pulsing. Intravital imaging studies are consistent with pulsing, but technical limitations (~4.5-h maximum for movies in xenografts) made it impossible to link ERK pulses to proliferation. While it may be possible to obtain fixed-cell data on different MAPK configurations in actual human tumors, live-cell studies of on-treatment tumors are impossible given current technology. Our data strongly implicate RTKs and autocrine/paracrine signaling in pulsing, and dead cell bodies may express the AXL ligand Gas6 in an active form, but the involvement of multiple growth factors in generating ERK pulses makes it difficult to demonstrate a role for any single ligand. For simplicity, we have focused mechanistic modeling on the protypical autocrine ligand EGF, even though this might not be the only relevant ligand in human tumors. Computational modeling as performed in this study provides a sufficient explanation for MAPK activity in the presence of MEK or RAF inhibitors, but it does not exclude additional mechanisms (e.g., MEK and ERK dimerization or binding to KSR scaffolds). Our use of an extensible rule-based modeling framework will facilitate future study of additional mechanisms.
STAR★METHODS
Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper and include the following:
RESOURCE AVAILABILITYLead ContactFurther information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Peter Sorger (peter_sorger@hms.harvard.edu).Materials AvailabilityCell lines generated for this work are available upon request from the Lead Contact.Data and Code AvailabilityAll experimental and simulation tabular datasets (.csv files) are available in the Synapse database (https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn20551877/files/, Synapse ID: syn20551877, https://doi.org/10.7303/syn20551877). Table S4 contains a description for each supplementary dataset.Gene expression data (RNA seq) are available at GEO (Gene Expression Omnibus, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/, accession number: GEO: GSE127988).The SRM proteomics data is available in the Panorama public database (https://panoramaweb.org/fWeE7i.url).The original code for constructing and running the MARM1 kinetic model is publicly available at GitHub (https://github.com/labsyspharm/marm1-supplement).The scripts used to generate the figures reported in this paper are available in the Synapse database (https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn20551877/files/, Synapse ID: syn20551877, https://doi.org/10.7303/syn20551877).Any additional information required to reproduce this work is available from the Lead Contact.
EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILSCell Lines and Tissue CultureCell lines used in this study were obtained from the Massachusetts General Hospital Cancer Center and originated from the following primary sources: A375, C32, K2, RVH421, WM115, SKMEL28, and WM1552C (ATCC);MMACSF (RIKEN BioResource Center); and MZ7MEL (Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz). HEK293T was from ATCC. C32, K2,MMACSF, SKMEL28, RVH421, and WM115 cell lines were grown in DMEM/F12 (Invitrogen) supplemented with 5% heat inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS) (Gibco) and 1% sodium pyruvate (Invitrogen). MZ7MEL and WM1552C were grown in RPMI-1640 (Corning) supplemented with 5% FBS and 1% sodium pyruvate (Invitrogen). A375 cells were grown in Dulbecco’s modified eagle medium with 4.5 g/l D-glucose, 4 mM L-glutamine, and 1mM sodium pyruvate (DMEM) (Corning), supplemented with 5% FBS. HEK293T cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS. Penicillin and streptomycin were added to all growth media at final concentrations of 100 U/mL and 100 μg/mL, respectively (Corning). Cells were tested for mycoplasma contamination using the MycoAlert mycoplasma detection kit (Lonza).Xenografts for FFPE ImagingFormalin-Fixed Paraffin-Embedded (FFPE) tissue slides of A375 xenografts were prepared as previously described (Fallahi-Sichani et al., 2017). Briefly, six-week-old NU/J mice (Jackson Laboratory, Stock# 002019) were injected subcutaneously in the right flank with 2.5 million A375 cells. Tumor xenografts were allowed to grow, and mice were then randomly split into two groups. Animals in first group were treated daily for 5 days with 200 mL dabrafenib (25 mg/kg) plus trametinib (2.5 mg/kg) via oral gavage (OG) and with an intraperitoneal (IP) injection control (DT treated group). Animals in the second group were given equivalent volumes of OG and IP vehicle controls (VV control group). The vehicle for OG was 0.5% hydroxypropylmethylcellulose, 0.2% Tween 80 in pH 8.0 distilled water. Tumor volume was calculated from daily measurements by caliper (see Figure S5A). After 5 days, mice were transcardially perfused with oxygenated and heparinized Tyrode’s solution which allowed for simultaneous euthanasia and exsanguination. Flank xenografts were then surgically removed and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS and stored at 4 °C for 48 h. All fixed tumors from a single group were uniformly paraffin embedded into a single block holder and sectioned in 5 μM slices.Xenograft for Live-Cell Intravital ImagingAll animal research was performed in accordance with guidelines from the Institutional Subcommittee on Research Animal Care, and studies related to intravital microscopy were performed under approval of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at Massachusetts General Hospital. Titanium dorsal skin-fold window chambers (APJ Trading) were implanted in 6–10-week-old female nu/nu mice (MGH Cox7), and 2 × 106 A375 reporter cells in 50 μl PBS were injected under the fascia. Analgesic buprenorphine was used prior to, and for 3 days after, surgical implantation, which was performed under 2% isoflurane supplied with 2 L/min O2. Window chambers were sealed with sterile coverslips, and mice were supplied prophylactically with drinking water containing antibiotics.
METHOD DETAILS
Construction of CRISPRi and CRISPRa A375 Cell LinesAll lentivirus particles were produced in HEK293T cells transfected with the lentiviral plasmid of interest (as described in relevant sections on cloning). psPAX2 (Addgene #12260) and pCMV-VSV-G (Addgene #8454) were introduced into cells in a 2:2:1 molar ratio using lipofectamine 3000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. After 2 days, growth medium containing the lentiviral particles was harvested, centrifuged, filtered through a 0.45 μM low-protein binding membrane and stored at −80 °C.To generate an A375 cell line stably expressing dCas9-KRAB (A375_i), A375 cells were transduced with lentiviral particles produced using vector pMH0001 (Addgene #85969; which expresses dCas9-BFP-KRAB from a spleen focus forming virus (SFFV) promoter with an upstream ubiquitous chromatin opening element) in the presence of 8 μg/mL polybrene (Sigma). A pure polyclonal population of dCas9-KRAB expressing cells was generated by two rounds of fluorescence activated cell sorting (FACS) gated on the top half of BFP positive cells (BD FACS Aria II). The performance of A375_i in knocking down endogenous genes was evaluated by individually targeting 3 control genes (ST3GAL4, SEL1L, DPH1) and measuring gene expression changes by RT-qPCR (dataset provided in Synapse database, see Table S4 and Data availability).To generate an A375 cell line stably co-expressing dCas9 fused to SunTag, and a SunTag-binding antibody fused to the VP64 transcriptional activator (A375_a), A375 cells were first transduced with lentiviral particles produced using vector pHRdSV40-dCas9–10xGCN4_v4-P2A-BFP (Addgene #60903; expresses dCas9 tagged with 10 copies of the GCN4 peptide v4 and BFP) in the presence of 8 μg/mL polybrene. After selection of BFP positive cells using one round of FACS, cells were transduced with lentiviral particles produced using vector pHRdSV40-scFv-GCN4-sfGFP-VP64-GB1-NLS (Addgene #60904; expresses a single-chain variable fragment that binds to the GCN4 peptide fused to GFP and VP64) in the presence of 8 mg/mL polybrene. Single cells with high GFP levels (top 25% of GFP positive cells) and high BFP levels (top 50% of BFP positive cells) were isolated by FACS. Monoclonal cell lines were expanded and a single clone exhibiting robust growth and robust overexpression of target genes was selected as cell line A375_a. The performance of A375_a in overexpressing endogenous genes was evaluated by individually targeting 3 control genes (CDKN1C, SLC4A1, POU5F1) and measuring gene expression changes by RT-qPCR (dataset provided in Synapse database, see Table S4 and Data availability).
CRISPRi and CRISPRa A375 Cell Lines Targeting EGFRPairs of complementary synthetic oligonucleotides (Integrated DNA Technologies) forming sgRNA protospacers flanked by BstXI and BlpI restriction sites were annealed and ligated into BstXI/BlpI double digested plasmid pU6-sgRNA EF1Alpha-puro-T2A-BFP (Addgene #60955). Protospacer sequences used to target individual genes and synthetic oligonucleotides used to build them are listed in Table S2. The sequence of all sgRNA expression vectors was confirmed by Sanger sequencing. Lentivirus particles were produced using these vectors as described earlier.A375_i and A375_a cells were infected with sgRNA expression vectors by addition of lentivirus supernatant to the culture medium in the presence of 8 μg/mL polybrene. Transduced cells were selected using puromycin (1.0 μg/mL) starting 48 hr post-transduction and over the course of a minimum of 7 days with daily addition of the antibiotic. After 24 hr growth in puromycin-free medium, 1.05 cells were harvested and total RNA was extracted using the RNeasy Plus Mini kit (Qiagen). cDNA was synthesized from 0.1 μg total RNA using Superscript IV reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen) and oligo(dT)20 primers (Invitrogen), following the manufacturer’s instructions. Reactions were diluted four-fold with water and qPCR was performed in 10 μL reactions in 384-well plates using PowerUp SYBR Green PCR Master mix (ThermoFisher Scientific), 2 μL of diluted cDNA preparation, and 0.4 μM of primers using a QuantStudio 6 real-time PCR system (Applied Biosystems). All qPCR primers are listed in the dataset provided in Synapse database, see Table S4 and Data availability. To calculate changes in expression level of target genes, all gene specific Ct values were first normalized to GAPDH Ct values (ΔCt). Log2 fold changes in expression were then determined by the difference between the ΔCt value of targeting sgRNAs and that of a non-targeting negative control sgRNA (A375_iNC or A375_aNC) (ΔΔCt).
Generation of Clonal Cell LinesA375 cells were grown for at least two passages to 80% confluence in a 10 cm dish. Cells were washed with PBS and then incubated with 0.25% trypsin/2.21 mM EDTA (Corning) for 2 min. After adding 20 mL complete medium, cells were thoroughly homogenized into a single cell suspension. Cell count and homogeneity was determined using a TC20 automated cell counter (Bio-Rad). The cell suspension was serially diluted with tissue culture medium cotaining 10% FBS to a final concentration of 20 cells in 15 mL and 150 μL of that dilution was dispensed in wells of a 96-well plate (0.2 cells per well). After about 14 days, wells that showed clonal growth (15–20 per 96-well plate) were expanded by passaging cells into larger dishes in complete medium.
ERK Activity Fluorescent Reporter Cell LineA375 cells were transfected with plasmids 4_pPB_ERKKTRmTq2_H2BVenus_mCherryGeminin (Fallahi-Sichani et al., 2017) and pCMV_hyPBase (Fallahi-Sichani et al., 2017) at a 5:2 ratio (w/w) using lipofectamine 3000 according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Transfected cells were selected using puromycin (1 μg/mL) starting 48 hr after transfection and over the course of 7 days. A polyclonal population of cells expressing all 3 fluorescent proteins (mturquoise2, Venus and mCherry) was subsequently generated by two rounds of FACS (BD FACS Aria II).
Drugs and Growth FactorsThe following chemicals from MedChem Express were dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) at 10 mM: vemurafenib, dabrafenib, PLX8394, AZ628, LY3009120, cobimetinib, trametinib, selumetinib, binimetinib, PD0325901, lapatinib, erlotinib, SHP099, R248, infingratinib. The following ligands were from Peprotech (catalogue number): EGF (100–15), NRG1 (100–03), FGF8 (100–25A), HGF (100–39). All ligands were prepared in media supplemented with 0.1% bovine serum albumin.
Immunofluorescence Staining, Quantitation, and Analysis for Cell CulturesThe following primary and conjugated antibodies with specified vendor, animal sources and catalogue numbers were used in immunofluorescence analysis of cells and tissues at the specified dilution ratios: p-ERKT202/Y204 rabbit mAb (Cell Signaling Technology, clone D13.14.4E, Cat# 4370), 1:800; p-MEKS217/221 rabbit mAb (Cell Signaling Technology, Cat# 9121), 1:200; p90RSKT359 rabbit mAb (Cell Signaling Technology, D1E9, Cat# 8753), 1:400; EGFR mouse mAb (Thermo Fisher, 199.12, Cat# MA5–13319), 1:100; Axl Rabbit mAb (Cell Signaling Technology, Cat#8661), 1:100; cMet Rabbit mAb (Cell Signaling Technology, Cat#); c-Met (D1C2) Rabbit mAb (Cell Signaling Technology, Cat#8198), 1:100; phospho-γH2AX (Ser139) rabbit mAB (Cell Signaling Technology, Cat# 9718), 1:400; pS6S240/S244 Alexa Fluor 488 Conjugate rabbit mAb (Cell Signaling Technology, D68F8, Cat# 5018), 1:800; pS6S235/S236 Alexa Fluor 555 Conjugate rabbit mAb (Cell Signaling Technology, D57.2.2E, Cat# 3985), 1:400. Immunofluorescence assays for cultured cells were performed using cells seeded in either 96-well plates (Corning Cat#3603) or 384-well plates (CellCarrier Cat#6007558) for 24 hr and then treated with compounds or ligands either using a Hewlett-Packard D300 Digital Dispenser or by manual dispensing.Cells were fixed in 4% PFA for 30 min at room temperature (RT) and washed with PBS with 0.1% Tween-20 (Sigma) (PBS-T), permeabilized in methanol for 10 min at RT, rewashed with PBS-T, and blocked in Odyssey blocking buffer (OBB LI-COR Cat. No. 927401) for 1 hr at RT. Cells were incubated overnight at 4 °C with primary antibodies in OBB. Cells were then stained with rabbit and/or with mouse secondary antibodies from Molecular Probes (Invitrogen) labeled with Alexa Fluor 647 (Cat# A31573) or Alexa Fluor 488 (Cat# A21202) both at 1:2000 dilution. Cells were washed with PBS-T and then PBS and were next incubated in 250 ng/mL Hoechst 33342 and 1:2000 HCS CellMask™ Blue Stain solution (Thermo Scientific) for 20 min. Cells were washed twice with PBS and imaged with a 10× objective using a PerkinElmer Operetta High Content Imaging System. 9–11 sites were imaged in each well for 96-well plates and 4–6 sites for 384-well plates.Image segmentation, analysis, and signal intensity quantitation were performed using the Columbus software (PerkinElmer). Cytosol and nuclear areas were identified by using two different thresholds on the CellMask™ Blue Stain (low intensity) and Hoechst channels (~100-fold more intense) and cell boundaries were used to define membrane (2 pixels surrounding cytosolic area), cytosolic and nuclear cell masks. Cells were identified and enumerated according to successful nuclear segmentation. Apart when otherwise specified, immunofluorescence quantifications are average signals of the cytosolic area. Population average and single cell data were analyzed using custom MATLAB 2017a code. Single cell density scatter plots were generated using signal intensities for individual cells.
EdU Incorporation ExperimentsPrior to immunofluorescence staining (as above), cells were pulsed for 3 hr with EdU (Lumiprobe, Hunt Valley, MD). After fixing, antibody staining and image segmentation, DNA content was quantified by using the total Hoechst intensity within the nuclear mask and EdU incorporation was quantified by the average intensity within the nuclear mask. The threshold for identification of EdU positive cells was determined by evaluating DMSO control cells (Edu intensity of 300 a.u.).
Immunofluorescence Staining, Quantitation, and Analysis of FFPE Xenograft Tissue SlidesDewaxing, antigen retrieval and staining of FFPE samples was performed as previously described (Lin et al., 2018) with the following modifications. Samples were subjected to three rounds of photochemical bleaching, then stained with Hoechst 33342 (2 μg/mL) in OBB and antibodies against p-ERK (1:200, Cell Signaling Technologies, Cat. No. 4370S), then anti-rabbit IgG (1:2000, Thermo Fisher, Cat. No. A31573) and finally S100 (1:200, Abcam, ab207367), p-S6 (1:100, Cell Signaling Technologies, Cat. No. 3985S). Slides were imaged using a CyteFinder fluorescence microscope (RareCyte) with 10× (NA=0.3) and 40× (NA=0.6) objectives. We generated whole tumor images from image tiles using Ashlar, a software tool that performs simultaneous stitching and registration of cyclic microscopy images of large tissue sections (https://github.com/labsyspharm/ashlar). We combined Ilastik1.3.2 (Sommer et al., 2011) and CellProfiler3.1.8 (Lamprecht et al., 2007) to enable robust single cell segmentation across all xenograft samples. We used random forest classification implemented in Ilastik to train three distinct classes (nuclei, membrane, and background) to create probability maps for each class. Large images were divided into two images (left and right) to improve performance. Subsequently, Cell-Profiler was used to segment those probability maps to create labeled single cell masks. Intensity of pERK and S100 staining was quantified within the cellular masks and CSV files were created for downstream analysis using histoCAT (Schapiro et al., 2017) (https://github.com/BodenmillerGroup/histoCAT).
Intravital Live-Cell MicroscopyUpon tumor formation 1–2 weeks post-implantation, subjects were imaged on a FluoView FV1000MPE confocal imaging system (Olympus America). Images were acquired with a XLFluor 2x air objective (NA=0.14, Olympus) or a XLUMPLFLN 20x water immersion objective (NA=1.0, Olympus), with 1–4x digital zoom. Fluorescence channels were sequentially excited with an Argon-ion laser at 458 nm and 515 nm and with a diode laser at 559 nm using a DM 404–458/515/559–561 dichroic beam splitter. CFP emission light was collected using a SDM510 dichroic beam splitter and a BA480–495 filter, YFP with a SDM560 and a BA535–565 filter, and mCherry using a BA575–675 filter. In treated subjects, 25 mg/kg dabrafenib and 2.5 mg/kg trametinib (both from LC labs) were given by oral gavage in water with 1% DMSO and 0.5% methylcellulose, 48 hr and again 24 hr prior to the imaging session. On the day of the imaging experiment, the mice were anesthetized by isoflurane, mounted on a heated microscope stage (37 °C), and continually monitored for stable respiration. Each time-lapse imaging session was performed by (a) using 2x images to identify >3 representative tumor regions for imaging at higher 20x magnification, (b) programming the microscope stage to acquire confocal z-stacks at each position, typically with z-slices at 5 μM depth intervals, and (c) imaging each selected tumor region at roughly 5 min intervals, for a duration of up to 6 hr.
Western Blot Staining, Quantitation, and AnalysisCells were harvested at 70–80% confluence and lysates were prepared by incubation in Laemmli Sample Buffer (Bio-Rad, #1610737) for 5 min at 95 °C. Lysates were subjected to SDS-PAGE using 4–20% polyacrylamide gels (Bio-Rad, #456–9036). After transfer onto nitrocellulose, proteins were detected using primary antibodies from Cell Signaling (EGFR, #4267, 1:1000) and Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Actin-HRP, #sc-47778 HRP, 1:5,000) and secondary HRP-conjugated antibodies from Cell Signaling (#7074 and #7076, 1:10,000). HRP was detected using ECL substrate purchased from Thermo Scientific (#34076) using a myECL Imager, and signals were quantified using the Image Studio Lite software (LI-COR Biosciences) by normalizing the specific signal for each sample to the Actin signal.
Receptor Quantification by Luminex Bead-Based ELISAAbsolute receptor abundances for EGFR, Her2, Her3 and c-Met were quantified using a Luminex bead-based ELISA procedure as previously described (Claas et al., 2018). A375 cells were cultured in the presence or absence of vemurafenib (1μM) for 24 hr and then one of four growth factors (EGF, NRG1, FGF8 and HGF at 100 ng/mL) was added for 24 hr. Cells were lysed in 50 μL NP40 lysis buffer (20 mM Tris–HCl, 150mM NaCl, 2 mM EDTA, 1% NP40, 10% Glycerol, pH 7.4) at 4 °C and lysates were were clarified by centrifugation for 15 min at ~2300 ×g and stored at − 20 °C prior to use. For Met, EGFR, Her2 and Her3, capture antibodies (MAB3581, AF231, MAB1129, and MAB3481, respectively), biotinylated detection antibodies (BAF358, BAF231, BAF1129, and BAM348, respectively) and recombinant proteins used for quantification (8614-MT, 344-ER, 1129-ER, and 348-RB respectively) were from R&D systems. Streptavidin Phycoerythrin (SAPE) was from Biorad (#171304501).Capture antibody conjugated beads were generated by incubation of MagPix beads (Luminex Corp.) with 5 mg/mL EDC (N-(3-dime-thylaminopropyl)-N’-ethylcarbodiimide, Sigma) and 5 mg/mL S-NHS (N-hydroxysulfosuccinimide, Pierce) in 80mM NaH2PO4 pH 6.3 for 20 min in the dark at RT. After washing, the beads were incubated with 0.1 mg/mL capture antibody in 50mM HEPES, pH 7.4 at 4 °C overnight. After washing, beads were stored at 4 °C in PBS + 1% BSA and 1% Tween20. After addition of conjugated beads to wells of a 384-well Optiplate (Perkin Elmer) and washing with assay buffer (PBS + 0.1% BSA and 0.1% Tween20), cell lysate samples were added and incubated overnight at 4 °C with shaking at ~8000 rpm. Samples were diluted if necessary to be in the log-linear range of the standard curve determined with recombinant proteins. After washing, detection antibodies were diluted 1000× in assay buffer and incubated at RT for 1 hr with the sample. After washing, SAPE was diluted 100× in assay buffer, added to wells and incubated at RT for 15 min. After final washing, samples were read on a Flexmap 3D machine (Luminex Corp) according to manufacturer’s protocol.
Live-Cell MicroscopyA375 cells expressing the ERK activity fluorescent reporter (see above) were plated on poly-D-lysine-coated glass bottom dishes (MatTek, P35G-0.170–14-C) 48 hr prior to imaging at a density of 30,000 cells per dish. Drugs were added 24 hr before imaging. Time lapse imaging was performed in DMEM without phenol red with 4.5 g/l glucose, L-glutamine, and sodium pyruvate (Corning) and supplemented with 5% FBS. Cells were imaged on a Nikon Eclipse TE-2000 inverted microscope with a 20× plan apo objective (NA 0.7 5) with a CCD camera. The microscope was enclosed with an environmental chamber to maintain humidity, a temperature of 37 °C and 5% CO2. Images were captured in CFP, YFP and Texas Red channels every 6 min using the MetaMorph software (Molecular Devices). The filter sets used were as follows: CFP–436/20nm, 455nm, 480/40nm (excitation filter, beam splitter, emission filter); YFP – 500/20nm, 515 nm, 520nm; Texas Red – 560/40nm, 585nm, 630/75nm; All filters were obtained from Chroma. Cell tracking and data analysis was performed using MATLAB scripts (Cappell et al., 2016; Reyes et al., 2018).
Note on the Validity of Using the ERK:KTR Live-Cell Reporter to Assay Kinase Activity at Different Cell-Cycle PhasesIn the course of this work we identified a potential complication with the ERK:KTR live-cell reporter even though it is widely used (Regot et al., 2014). We noticed that traces from single cells expressing ERK:KTR suggested that ERK becomes active in all S/G2 phases even when RAF or MEK inhibitors are present at high levels just before cells become Geminin positive (see end of traces in Figure 2C; in Videos S2 and S3). We did not observe ERK activity under these conditions using immunofluorescence staining and ERK:KTR translocation in S/G2 was unaffected by saturating doses of MEK or ERK inhibitors. We speculate that the ERK:KTR reporter can be activated in S/G2 phases by a CDK (e.g. CDK2) because the reporter contains a sequence similar to a degenerate CDK2 substrate motif. Phosphorylation at this site would result in modification of one of the two phosphosites controlling ERK:KTR nuclear-to-cytosolic translocation. If this is correct similar problems may affect other KTR reporters having the same backbone; these include the JNK and p38 KTR reporters (Regot et al., 2014) and the more recently described CDK4 KTR reporter (Yang et al., 2020).In this paper we collect ERK:KTR activity data only from A375 cells in G0/G1. We accomplished this by pre-treating A375 cells for 24 hours with RAF or RAF plus MEK inhibitors prior to the start of live-cell imaging. We ignored data from cells that were Geminin positive at start of imaging. As observed in a comparison of Figures 1A–1C with Figure 1H, ERK:KTR activity and pERK levels by immunofluorescence are very similar in G0/G1 cells. More specifically, we confirm a correspondence between ERK:KTR activity and anti-pERK immunofluorescence in: i) untreated A375 cells with active oncogenic signaling; ii) in the distribution of ERK activity in cells treated with RAF inhibitors (when ERK positivity is restricted to a small subset of pulsing cells); iii) the spatial distribution of pulsing cells with and without added growth factors; (iv) when MEK inhibitors are used at concentrations above 1 μM and above to suppress all ERK activity. We are therefore confident that the ERK:KTR traces for cells in G0/G1 phases as reported in this paper accurately reflect ERK activity.
Targeted Proteomics Quantification of Protein Abundance and PhosphorylationTargeted quantification of protein abundances and phosphorylation was performed as previously described (Shi et al., 2016). Briefly, cell pellets from A375 cell lines treated with different doses of vemurafenib were lysed in 100 μL of lysis buffer containing 8 M urea in 100mM NH4HCO3 (pH 7.8). Proteins were reduced by 5mM dithiothreitol for 1 hr at 37 °C and alkylated using 20 mM iodoacetamide for 1 hour at RT in the dark. Samples were diluted eightfold with 50mM NH4HCO3 and digested by sequencing grade modified trypsin at a 1:50 enzyme-to-protein ratio (w/w) at 37 °C for 3 hr. Each sample was then desalted by C18 solid phase extraction and concentrated to ~100 μL. The final peptide concentration was measured using bicinchoninic acid assay with an average of ~4 μg/μL. 10 μg and 100 μg of the peptide mixture per sample were used with the addition of 200 fmol and 50,000 fmol of crude heavy peptides for quantification of protein abundance and protein phosphorylation dynamics, respectively.For protein abundance quantification (Shi et al., 2016)(Yi et al., 2018), crude heavy-isotope labeled synthetic peptides were purchased from Thermo Scientific and the two best response peptides were selected to configure final selected reaction monitoring (SRM) assays for each target protein. All samples were measured by regular LC-SRM using the scheduled SRM algorithm (Shi et al., 2017) for simultaneous quantification of the selected target proteins. For targeted quantification of phosphorylation (Yi et al., 2018), phosphopeptides were selected for core component proteins for the EGFR-MAPK pathway. Crude heavy-isotope-labeled phosphopeptides were purchased from New England peptides and spiked into the peptide sample prior to phosphopeptide enrichment. Phosphopeptides were enriched by immobilized metal-ion affinity chromatography (IMAC) with Fe3+-NTA agarose beads. Eluted phosphopeptides were dried down and stored at −80 °C until further LC-MS/MS analysis. Lyophilized phosphopeptides were reconstituted in 0.1% FA and subjected to LC-SRM analysis immediately. All LC-SRM measurements were performed using the nanoACQUITY UPLC system coupled online to a TSQ Vantage triple quadrupole mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific). SRM data were analyzed using Skyline software (MacLean et al., 2010) and the best transitions without interferences were used for quantification. The SRM peak area ratios of the endogenous light peptides over heavy peptide standards (i.e., the L/H ratio) were reported for all SRM measurements. The SRM proteomics data were deposited in the Panorama public database (https://panoramaweb.org/fWeE7i.url).
Transcript ProfilingA375 cells were plated in 24-well plates (Corning, #353047) with 475uL of growth media and allowed to adhere for 24 hours till 50% confluency. Cells were then treated with vemurafenib alone or in combination with cobimetinib and stimulated with EGF (100 ng/mL) at the times indicated by the experimental design. Each condition was performed twice on two different days, for a total of four replicates, two biological with two technical replicates each. Cells were lysed in 96 well plates and RNA was extracted using Applied Biosystems MagMax 96 total RNA isolation kit (Thermo Fisher, # AM1830) with on bead DNase digestion. Sample concentrations were determined by Nanodrop and RNA quality was assessed on a subset of samples by Bioanalyzer (Agilent); all samples scored RINs of > 9.0. RNA sequencing library preparation was performed with the High Throughput TruSeq Stranded mRNA Library Prep Kit (Illumina, # RS-122–2103) following the manufacturer’s protocol at half reaction volume. Input for each sample consisted of 500 ng of RNA and 5 μL of 1:500 diluted ERCC spike-in mix 2 (Ambion). Libraries were amplified for 11 cycles during the final amplification step. Libraries were quantified using the Qubit dsDNA HS assay (Thermo Fisher Scientific). Library size and quality were spot checked for a subset of samples by Bioanalyzer (Agilent). The average size of cDNA fragments in the libraries was 330 bp. Libraries were pooled at equimolar concentrations then the pool was quantitated using the KAPA library quantification kit (KAPA Biosystems). Libraries were sequenced single end 75 base pairs using NextSeq500 (Illumina) at the Biopolymer’s Facility (Harvard School). For data analysis, RNAseq reads were aligned against GRCh38 human reference using HISAT2 (Kim et al., 2015) in the bcbio framework and gene expression counts in reads per million (RPM) and standard deviations from four replicates were calculated and analyzed with custom MATLAB software. Gene expression data (RNA seq) were deposited in the GEO (Gene Expression Omnibus, https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/, accession number: GEO: GSE127988).
Estimation of Clinically Accessible Drug Dose RangesClinically accessible drug dose ranges for vemurafenib, dabrafenib, cobimetinib and trametinib were calculated from published concentrations measured in the plasma of human subjects (see Table S3 for values and references).
Model Construction and DefinitionMARM1 was built using PySB (Lopez et al., 2013) extended to include support for energy-based BNG (Sekar et al., 2017). Parameters were estimated using AMICI (Fröhlich et al., 2017), pyPESTO (Stapor et al., 2018) and parallelized for cluster computation using SnakeMake (Köster and Rahmann, 2012). The main model features are explained in the main text and a detailed description of model construction and parameter estimation procedures is provided in Data S1.
Estimation of Receptor-Driven ERK Signaling from Immunofluorescence Data or ModellingWe calculated the net contribution of receptor-driven ERK signaling to MAPK activation by subtracting unstimulated pERK or pMEK signaling from pERK or pMEK signaling measured in the same conditions but after growth factors stimulation. This was done using immunofluorescence data or model simulations to highlight the distinct contribution of receptor activation to MAPK signaling.
Supplementary Material
1
3
4
5
6
7
