1 ∣
INTRODUCTION
Incidental findings have received considerable attention since the introduction and application of genome and exome sequencing. These findings are typically defined as the identification of gene variants that have health importance for an individual, discovered in the conduct of clinical sequencing but not related to the disease under investigation (Boardman & Hale, 2018). In 2013, the American College of Medical Genetics and Genomics (ACMG) released recommendations to return incidental findings for 56 selected genes associated with 24 conditions (Green et al., 2013). A revised statement was published by ACMG in 2017 that changed the terminology of ‘incidental findings’ to ‘secondary findings’ because the list of genes were intentionally analyzed as opposed to found incidentally (Kalia et al., 2017). Other significant revisions to the ACMG recommendations included the option for patients to opt out for the return of secondary findings (SFs) and to have a process for curating and updating a list of genes from clinical genomic sequencing over time.
Return of SFs is routinely conducted in the clinical setting and is expected to continue to increase with the rapid growth of next-generation sequencing technology (Shahmirzadi et al., 2014). A survey of genetic counselors reported that many genetic professionals are returning SFs, and this added responsibility has increased challenges to already complex and time-consuming counseling sessions (Smith, Douglas, Braxton, & Kramer, 2015). Another study interviewed genetics specialists' perspectives about disclosure of SFs and found that 62% of participants stated they had personally disclosed and/or discussed SFs to patients (Downing, Williams, Daack-Hirsch, Driessnack, & Simon, 2013). Some of the concerns identified during the return of SFs included inconsistent definitions of SFs, when to inform patients, how to minimize psychological harm, and the need for flexible disclosure guidelines.
As the volume of data that are generated from sequencing increases, the numbers of SFs will likely correspond (Roche & Berg, 2015). Pretest counseling is critical to prepare patients to understand the implications and limitations of testing for the return of SFs (Bernhardt et al., 2015). Further, several publications examined the importance of including patients in the decision of what SFs to receive (Christenhusz, Devriendt, Peeters, Van Esch, & Dierickx, 2014; Smith et al., 2015; Yu, Harrell, Jamal, Tabor, & Bamshad, 2014). While the literature provides support from both healthcare providers and patients for return of SFs, other research has identified potential problems with relying on pretest counseling or informed consent as a stand-alone indication for the return of SFs. Roche and Berg (2015) suggest that ‘even when participants express an intention to learn secondary findings, these initial predictions may not reflect an unequivocal desire for them’. This notion is supported by results from Christenhusz et al. (2014), which state, ‘patients and their families admitted they could not anticipate their own preferences about whether or not to receive results until they were returned’.
Some have argued that there are ethical considerations for both returning and not returning results (Christenhusz, Devriendt, Van Esch, & Dierickx, 2015). Risks of psychological harm to patients may come from overemphasizing the possibility of SF discovery or by disclosing SFs in an insensitive or inappropriate way (Kohane, Masys, & Altman, 2006; Veenstra, Roth, Garrison, Ramsey, & Burke, 2010). This concern of causing psychological harm and duty to protect their patients from the return of SFs was also further supported in interviews with genetic professionals (Downing et al., 2013; Townsend et al., 2012). Common practices and lessons learned from experiences in returning SF results could guide best practices as clinical sequencing continues to gain widespread use (Bernhardt, Kellom, Barbarese, Faucett, & Wapner, 2014).
Identifying how best to practically return SFs to patients within a session is not well documented. Few studies have sought to explore the experiences and strategies of individuals involved in the return of SFs from clinical sequencing. Of those, these studies were either prospective or hypothetical and focused more on attitudes of researchers, healthcare providers, and patients toward the disclosure of SFs (Appelbaum et al., 2014; Ayuso, Millan, Mancheno, & Dal-Re, 2013; Bernhardt et al., 2014; Tabor et al., 2012). As advancements in technology increase the frequency of genome and exome sequencing, studies that describe the actual experiences and content of the discussion of the return of SFs are needed. This study described and categorized the experiences of genetic counselors in the return of SFs from clinical sequencing.
2 ∣
MATERIALS AND METHODS
2.1 ∣Study design and participantsInstitutional Review Board (IRB) approval was obtained from both the hospital and the academic center institutional review boards prior to beginning any research activity. The study was designed to investigate how genetics counselors return SFs to patients in the clinical setting. A semi-structured interview and qualitative descriptive approach was deliberately chosen as the best methodology to capture the experiences, thoughts, and lessons learned of genetic counselors. Paired with qualitative content analysis, qualitative description provides pragmatic yet meaningful answers to research questions by focusing on the facts presented and the use of participants' own words, without requiring reliance on preexisting frameworks and theories (McIntosh & Morse, 2015; Sandelowski, 2000). This approach to qualitative descriptive research has been well supported in the literature and accurately captures self-reported participant experiences by using data and codes that closely reflect the actual statements of the participants (Rothwell et al., 2017).The semi-structured interview provides a structure for qualitative description research, eliciting through sequential questions participants' perspectives regarding an experience, and allows flexibility for the participant and researcher (McAllister, 2001; Semaka, Balneaves, & Hayden, 2013). Participants can respond to questions as they wish (or decline to answer altogether), and the researcher can sensitively probe using impromptu follow-up questions as needed (McIntosh & Morse, 2015). The semi-structured interview guide was developed from a review of the medical literature and input from the research team. The interview questions covered general domains, including characterizing the type of return (i.e., clinical setting, specialty category the SF fell under, in-person versus over-the-phone return), description of the preparation carried out before the return, experiences in the return process itself, and gathering recommendations based on lessons learned. See Table 1 for a list of representative questions.To recruit study participants, a recruitment letter was sent through the E-blast Student Research Survey Program of the National Society of Genetic Counselors in February 2017. The letter directed interested participants to contact the principal investigator via email to discuss participation in this study. Eligibility criteria included being currently employed as a genetics professional (i.e., genetic counselor) and personally returning at least one secondary genetic finding to a patient in the clinical setting.Interviews were conducted over a 2-month period (February–March). All participants who responded to the email blast within this timeframe were interviewed. (One participant contacted the principal investigator in April and was not interviewed.) The principal investigator of the study (CR) conducted all of the telephone interviews (n = 21), which lasted between 20 and 40 min with a mean time of 32 min. Prior to beginning the telephone interview, all participants verbally consented to having the interview audio-recorded. Personal and professional demographics were also collected, including age, race, years of experience in genetic counseling, and specialty of practice at the time of SF return experience (see Table 2). Upon completion of the interview, each participant was emailed a $25 gift card.
2.2 ∣Data analysisEach telephone interview was audio-recorded, professionally transcribed, and checked for accuracy by the principal investigator (CR). The research team adhered to tenets of research reproducibility for qualitative data in sensitive research studies (Clark, Birkhead, Fernandez, & Egger, 2017). Specifically, interview audio recordings were stored on a secure, university-owned server. The recordings were uploaded to a secure website of a transcription company and transcribed within a week. The recordings were then deleted from the transcription vendor's server but retained on the university server. After the transcripts were returned to the study team, a member checked for accuracy by reading the transcripts and listening to the recordings (CR). All original recordings were deleted within 2 weeks after the transcription was complete.A qualitative content analysis was conducted on the transcripts. Prior to analysis, team members received training conducted by a member of the research team (ER) who has extensive knowledge on qualitative data analysis. Transcripts were then imported into Dedoose for analysis. The initial two transcripts were read through once carefully to identify codes (sections of text expressing a similar concept) that were generated from participant responses and the topics of the interview guide (Rothwell, Ellington, Planalp, & Crouch, 2012). Next, the coding template was applied to transcripts, and additional codes were added as needed. Throughout the data analysis process, team meetings were conducted to review the coding and ensure accuracy of the coding template. The codes were then grouped into larger descriptive categories based on similarity of the data. We then returned to the transcripts and recontextualized the data for development of categories (Miles, Huberman, & Saldaña, 2014). Reviewing and recontextualizing the data was the most significant and time-consuming aspect of the analysis (Morgan, 2010). The researchers also used the approach of reflexivity during the data analysis to limit personal bias into the interpretation (Baillie, 2015).
3 ∣
RESULTS
For the purpose of this paper, we chose to use the general term ‘secondary findings’ for terms related to any unanticipated, incidental, or discovery findings from the results of genetic testing for diagnostic or management purposes. A total of 21 genetic counselors who represented 56 different return of secondary findings were interviewed. Demographic data on participants are summarized in Table 2. Characteristics of SFs and return practices are outlined in Table 3. The results are organized into four major categories, which include (a) reliance on pretest counseling when returning SFs, (b) how primary test results influenced the level of importance placed on the SFs, (c) patients' two-stage emotional reactions to receiving SFs, and (d) how the return of SFs changed the way genetic counselors offered pretest counseling.
3.1 ∣Reliance on pretest counseling when returning SFsOne of the most frequently discussed categories within each of the interviews was the reliance on beginning the conversation about whether or not the patient received pretest counseling before returning SFs. All of the interviewees started their conversations for return of SFs by asking patients if they remembered if this was discussed during pretest counseling. Two representative quotes that captured this strategy included the following: ‘I would start with reminding them [patients] that they opted to find out that type of information’ (Interviewee 5) and ‘I did it in terms of prepping them for the information and reminding them, “Remember when you were consented and we talked about this as a possibility?”’ (Interviewee 3). If the patient remembered, then the genetic counselor asked the patient to recall what they remembered.When asked why this was the preferred strategy to begin the return of SFs, many interviewees stated it helped to structure the delivery of difficult news and gave a previous shared experience with the genetic counselor that helped the patient with acceptance of receiving the result. One participant stated it served as a type of ‘warning shot’. Other participants stated: ‘You wanted to know that information. Both of them [patient and family member] were like, “Yes, we know. We definitely wanted any information that you could give us”’ (Interviewee 6), and ‘Some people welcome the information because they feel that they can be proactive. It's like, “It's good to know all this type of information”’ (Interviewee 15).If the patient did not remember or did not receive pretest counseling, many interviewees stated that this created a significant barrier within the session. Challenges encountered not only included delivering difficult news, but also dealing with the surprise of the patient receiving the unanticipated news. For example, one participant stated: ‘Especially for families who don't get their pre-test counseling, it's like a blow. They're not expecting it … it's been really difficult’ (Interviewee 15). Also, when the interviewee was not the same person who conducted the pretest counseling, he or she experienced additional difficulty and challenges during the session because of lack of connectedness to the entire process. Reasons why this was a barrier in the return of SFs included (a) the importance of maintaining continuity in counseling with the family and (b) the ability of the counselor to better understand the patient's emotional ability to manage the information. One quotation that captured this perspective is:I think having a good grasp of the family's dynamics but understanding the situation and having a lot of pre-test consent was very helpful to prepare me for discussing these results. If I hadn't met with the family previously, or if someone else had done the testing and I was just in charge of the results, it would have been much more difficult for me to gauge how they would take this.(Interviewee 7)
3.2 ∣How primary test results influenced the level of importance placed on the SFsThe severity of the primary result identified by the testing often influenced the amount of time spent returning the SFs. If the primary purpose for genetic testing had a significant result, the return of the SF was given less attention during the session. Further, adding news of an SF with an impactful, significant primary result might overamplify the emotions of the patient. For example, ‘Given everything else going on, we underplayed [SFs] to not overwhelm them, to be able to take one thing at a time’ (Interviewee 16). If the primary result was negative or ambiguous and the SF was significant, this shifts more time of the post-counseling session to an unexpected genetic finding of the patient, which in itself can be difficult (‘She was just left with more decisions, I think, than she was prepared for… she felt she was gonna be positive, and so she was surprised—positive for a gene not related to breast cancer’ (Interviewee 19)).However, interviewees stated that the most challenging situations occurred when the primary result and the SF were both clinically significant. During these situations, many of the interviewees strongly suggested two separate counseling sessions to deliver this information. Representative quotes included the following:I would just say that the experience of returning a secondary result with someone who has such a kind of significant primary result, I think, was especially challenging. That's one of those cases when you kind of look back and say this would be a scenario where if you had the time and they had the time that you would really do this in two visits.(Interviewee 13)If they did find a diagnosis for the proband, just maybe considering doing it as two separate sessions. Maybe focusing on the diagnosis for the proband, talking briefly about the secondary finding, but then explaining that they should probably come in for a second appointment to discuss this “cause it is a completely different issue from the diagnosis”.(Interviewee 3)
3.3 ∣Two stages of patient reactions to SFs: Emotion- and problem-focused copingMany of the interviewees also discussed how the patient reacted to the return of SFs and how patient responses influenced the interviewees' strategies for facilitating the session. Patient's initial reactions to receiving SFs ranged from very emotional to complete stoicism. Regardless of the amount of emotion in the response, surprise was almost always part of the patient's initial reaction. Representative quotes of this observation included the following:There was shock. The first thing was shock and surprise.(Interviewee 4)She didn't cry or anything like that, but I mean it was definitely, I think they were more kind of shocked by the information than anything. I think it was that initial, you know, just shock.(Interviewee 3)Following the initial surprised reaction, a commonly reported second phase of reactions was problem-focused coping when patients asked questions about the meaning of the SF. The two most frequent questions asked by patients after learning of an SF were as follows: ‘What's next?’ and ‘Who else in the family needs to know and/or do something about this?’ Interviewees reported that what seemed to help patients manage this second reaction to receiving an SF was to provide a plan of care for the patient and to give referrals to relevant providers. Interviewees stated that patients wished for guidance in preparing them to disclose this information to other family members: ‘I put together patient family information about [gene] mutations, what the recommendations are, family letters. I like to give a lot of resources to make the information as easy to forward to other relatives as possible’ (Interviewee 7).Another quote that captured the two stages of patients' reactions included the following:They were shocked and taken aback initially by the information. Just not expecting to get that type of finding, not knowing that that was possible and kind of then the initial shock of this getting information that they weren't expecting to receive. Then it turned into concern. Like, “What do we do with this information? How do we handle it? What can we do to prevent this from developing in our child?” as kind of the next step. Then kind of getting to the point of just providing more information.(Interviewee 15)
3.4 ∣How the return of SFs changed the way genetic counselors offered pretest counselingMany interviewees described experiencing a shift in the way they viewed their pretest counseling sessions after returning an SF. The hypothetical nature of returning an SF was gone, and the interviewees had a concrete experience to learn from to prepare future patients for this possibility. As a result, interviewees reported spending more time on the possibility of returning of SFs during pretest counseling than previous experiences. Representative quotations include the following:One thing I definitely have changed is my explanation of secondary findings. I go a little bit more into detail because beforehand, I mean – I ordered a lot of exomes and hadn't had any secondary findings. I breezed through in explaining them. I spend a little bit more time now just saying, “It could really affect your health”.(Interviewee 6)Since it's happened, having like, “We kind of talked about a minute ago”, you know, it's more real, so not kind of brushing over things as much, and making sure you really have a good conversation on the front end that this type of thing could happen.(Interviewee 8)Another change by interviewees during pretest counseling included gauging patient's comfort with uncertainty. Counselors discussed situations in which they try to engage patients in conversations exploring how an SF might impact them. One quote that captured this included the following:One of the things that I've done a lot with my counseling is kind of gauge people's comfort for uncertainty and the possibility of things that they – that we can't interpret … I engage them in conversations in the consenting process about what they'll do with these secondary results and how they'll discuss this with their family members if they are there … also engaging them to let them know that managing their expectations, it's the likelihood that we'll find any of these things in their family history is low, but remembering that these are still true possibilities.(Interviewee 16)
4 ∣
DISCUSSION
This study identified lessons learned by genetic counselors who returned secondary findings (SFs) in the clinical setting. Though there was diversity in regards to the types of SFs, medical specialty, other provider involvement, and whether the result return was in person or over the telephone, there were similarities across experiences of the interviewees. For example, the importance of pretest counseling and the severity of the primary test result influenced how the session was managed by the genetic counselor. Strategies were also discussed for managing reactions and questions from patients after receiving SF results. These data can help pinpoint essential pieces of the process for any professional who not only returns SFs to patients, but also those involved with ordering genetic sequencing. As such, a strength of this study is that it conceptualizes common categories despite the different experiences of the interviewees and gives an in-depth understanding of these situations from the provider's perspective.
Much of the literature on the return of SFs still focuses on the types of SFs and the choice of the patient to receive the SF as well as debates around what is medically actionable, the professional duty of a provider to do no harm, and whether SFs should be a targeted part of any testing (Saelaert, Mertes, De Baere, & Devisch, 2018). Further, there are no clear guidelines or steps for how this information should be returned within the clinical setting, thus leaving many professionals who do not have counseling expertise to deliver difficult information in the ever-growing application of genomics into clinical care. Numerous publications still state the need for more in-depth description of the actual experience of the clinical encounter to return SFs (Burke et al., 2013; Townsend, Adam, Birch, & Friedman, 2013). Yet, despite the recognition for more data about the lived experience of the clinical encounter during the return of SFs and documentation of how to best deliver this information, research evidence is still limited about the actual experiences of how SFs are returned.
However, the existing evidence does provide some guidance for helping professionals develop communication strategies for returning SFs to patients. This is highlighted by Boardman and Hale (2018), who synthesized evidence from 15 studies to form general categories for whether or not to return SFs. These categories could be used as a way to report the results from this study into suggestions to genetic counselors of what to expect, strategies, and information that may be useful when disclosing SFs to patients. Their recommendations included disclosing (a) the strength of the genotype/phenotype correlation; (b) the impact, severity, and treatability of the associated genetic disease; and (c) the relevance of the SF beyond the index case (Boardman & Hale, 2018). These recommendations generally correlated with strategies used by the counselors in this study.
The first category of whether to return SFs was relevant to our results. Interviewees considered the severity of the index case and the severity of the SF during the session. This guided the content of the information and how much discussion should be placed on the SF. Participants stated that pretest counseling for the possibility of receiving an SF from clinical genetic sequencing was fundamental. It not only guided the return process but it influenced how patients reacted to receiving the information. Consistent with other research literature, adequately counseling patients on what to expect during pre-counseling is as important as whether or not to return SFs and allowing patients to opt out (Kalia et al., 2017). Although this finding offers little guidance for professionals returning SF results when thorough pretest counseling was not conducted, it is consistent with conclusions from other studies that emphasize the need for pretest counseling (Christenhusz et al., 2014; Clayton & McGuire, 2012; Strong, Zusevics, Bick, & Veith, 2014).
Further, when dealing with the emotional responses and problem-based coping of patients discussed in this study, the interviewees used strategies to maximize patient comprehension, encouraged appropriate medical actions by the patient, and helped patients adjust to receiving unexpected health information; all of which can be incorporated when returning SFs in the second category by Boardman and Hale (2018). As described in our study, there were typically two stages of emotional reactions by patients when receiving SF results. The first was surprise, followed by problem-based coping about next steps. Discussing the emotions associated with surprise described by the interviewees that ranged from ‘very emotional to complete stoicism’ may help providers develop strategies to help the patient process emotions. As such, during pretest discussions or during the return of SFs, providers could give examples of how some people reacted to receiving such information and what they might do if an SF were to be discovered. Genetic counseling in this setting could include anticipatory activities, such as using a scenario which can be helpful when patients are unfamiliar with a disorder and/or have no family history of a condition associated on the ACMG list (Green et al., 2013). However, as noted above, providers must negotiate the delicate balance of placing too much emphasis on the SF during pretest counseling and causing unnecessary anxiety (Veenstra et al., 2010).
Problem-based coping after the emotional surprise of the SF was identified as the second stage of reactions by patients by the interviewees. Using the impact, severity, and treatability of the associated genetic disease, then identifying steps for helping patients cope with the SF was suggested. Some of these included future medical management, family communication, and reproductive risk. Preparation and strategies about these concerns and how to best help patients should be considered when delivering SFs.
Finally, the third category of ‘relevance of the SF beyond the index case’ was incorporated into the interviewees' experiences for returning SFs in this study. Participants reported that SF results were typically returned at the same time as the rest of the test results. In cases that involved significant primary results, participants reported that the patient and their family's ability to comprehend or even hear the SF was often lost. This finding could inform a new practice of returning primary results and significant SF results in two separate visits and may need to be contracted in the initial pretest counseling session. Another consideration is if the patient did not remember pretest counseling, it may be necessary to conduct a pre-session again to prepare them for the return of SFs, especially if there is a significant time delay from when the testing was conducted.
While our study offers in-depth, qualitative data describing genetic counselors' practices for returning SF results, and their perceptions of patient reactions to such results, it does have limitations. The data relied on accurate recall of past experiences. There are many variables that could contribute to the interviewees' experiences, and it is possible that self-selection by counselors to participate in this study may not reflect the experiences of other genetic counselors who return SFs. It may be that those counselors for whom the return of SF results was novel were more likely to respond. However, this study provides a good start for understanding the process of returning SFs and identified common categories across different experiences of the interviewees. Identifying how to deliver genetic findings sensitively to patients is critical, and studies have shown that we know much about what patients think they want to learn (Clift et al., 2015). This study fills a gap in the literature by describing the actual experiences of genetic counselors who returned SFs in the clinical setting.
