Introduction
By the year 2050, the number of adults age 65 and older in the United States is projected to nearly double, and the number of adults 85 years or older is expected to triple [1]. With the growing number of older adults, an estimated 27 million adults will receive nursing home (NH) or home-based services by 2050 [2]. As a result, there is a critical need for guidance in managing chronic diseases, such as hypertension, in the NH population [1–3]. Hypertension is extremely common among NH residents, with prevalence ranging from 72% to 90% worldwide [1,4–6]. Further, the majority of all NH residents are treated with at least one antihypertensive agent, and a substantial proportion of NH residents diagnosed with hypertension concurrently use multiple agents [4,5,7–10].
NH residents with hypertension represent a complex population that may require blood pressure (BP) targets and medication regimens that are tailored to their unique needs. On one hand, they are likely to have multiple comorbidities, including conditions that increase cardiovascular (CV) risk (e.g., diabetes or renal disease) as well as other cardiovascular conditions that are treated with antihypertensives (e.g., heart failure, atrial fibrillation, angina, stroke) [11,12]. Due to these indications, this population may potentially benefit from more intensive BP control to reduce CV risk [13–18]. On the other hand, frailty, fall risk, cognitive impairment, and polypharmacy (i.e., high medication burden) are major concerns among NH residents [17,19]. Intensive treatment with antihypertensives can exacerbate risk of falls, orthostasis, and adverse drug reactions in these patients [17,19]. This may be especially true in NH residents approaching the end of life, in whom a palliative care approach to medication management has been recommended [20]. Such an approach recognizes that as remaining life expectancy and time available to experience long-term benefits of medications decrease, goals of treatment should shift from curative or preventive to palliative, with a greater emphasis on avoiding short-term problems, including medication adverse events. In turn, less aggressive BP treatment targets may be appropriate, requiring a reduction in the number and/or dose of antihypertensives used [11].
Optimal treatment targets and medication management of hypertension in NH residents have not been well addressed in clinical practice guidelines and research. In this narrative review, we aimed to summarize and critically evaluate the quality of recent evidence on optimal BP targets and antihypertensive treatment approaches in NH residents specifically, as well as populations commonly represented in the NH with hypertension, i.e., older adults who are frail, have cognitive and functional impairments, and/or are nearing the end of life. We limited our review to publications within the last five years, with the exception of landmark clinical trials. We ordered our review by evidence type, including clinical practice guidelines, randomized controlled trials (RCTs), and observational studies. We summarized findings from primary literature using the PICO framework: population, interventions, comparators, and outcomes [21]. Specifically, we described groups of older adults (60 years or older with special attention given to patients in the “oldest old” age groups), with frailty, high-fall risk, cognitive impairment, cardiovascular comorbidities, and/or limited life expectancy. We defined interventions as specific BP targets (e.g. more intensive vs. less intensive control) and/or antihypertensive medication regimens (e.g., number or type of agents used; intensification or deintensification of medications). Additionally, we examined both cardiovascular and non-cardiovascular outcomes and described both benefits and risks of these treatments for hypertension. In conducting this review, our goal is to identify key gaps in evidence and define research priorities to help improve guidelines and care for NH residents with hypertension.
Evidence review
Clinical Practice GuidelinesSince the publication of results of the SPRINT trial showing cardiovascular benefits of more intensive BP control in ambulatory older adults (Table 1, and discussed in more detail below), there has been a paradigm shift in hypertension management guidelines from less intensive [13] to more intensive BP targets for older adults. Specifically, the 2017 AHA/ACC guidelines support a target of <130/80 mmHg for ambulatory adults age 65 or older [22], a revision from their earlier 2013 guidelines recommending a BP target of <140/90 mmHg. These same guidelines avoid stating a specific target BP range for adults 65 years or older with multiple comorbidities and limited life expectancy, instead recommending that treatment decisions be based on patient risks/benefits as determined by expert consensus, clinical judgment, patient preferences, and a team-based approach [22]. In adults 65 to 80 years old, the 2018 European Society of Cardiology (ESC)/European Society for Hypertension (ESH) guidelines recommend a systolic blood pressure (SBP) of 130–139 mmHg (with a diastolic target of <80 mmHg) [15]. These guidelines emphasize that age alone is not a basis for less intensive targets and stress the importance of close monitoring for those who are very old, frail, or have multiple comorbidities. For frail adults, ESC/ESH guidelines recommend considering antihypertensive monotherapy over combination therapy. Recent Canadian guidelines published in 2017 advocate a SBP target of <120 mmHg for adults who are age 75+, have cardiovascular disease, and/or are at high risk for cardiovascular disease [16]. In this update, the guidelines removed frailty as a factor for target modification, based on the SPRINT trial [16,18]. However, they caution generalizing this target to NH residents, due to limited evidence, and do not recommend this target for patients with high medication burden.In contrast, the American College of Physicians (ACP) and the American Academy of Family Physicians (AAFP) hypertension guidelines for adults aged 60 years and older did not weigh the SPRINT trial as heavily in their review and focused on risks of hypotension and adverse drug reactions among older adults [23,24]. Their recommended treatment target for older adults is a SBP <150 mmHg, similar to the 2014 JNC-8 (8th Joint National Committee) guideline recommendation of <150/90 mmHg [13,23]. The ACP/AAFP Task Force concluded that treating hypertension in older adults to <140 mmHg (compared to <150 mmHg) did not have additional benefit and may increase risk of harm, although stated that this lower target may be considered for patients with history of stroke/transient ischemic attack or those at high cardiovascular risk [23].Despite conflicting recommendations for optimal BP targets, all guidelines express caution in extrapolating treatment targets to those who are very frail, have limited functional status, and have multiple comorbidities (i.e., NH populations), noting limited evidence. In general, guidelines support use of five antihypertensive classes generally in all patients: angiotensin II receptor blockers (ARB); angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEi); beta blockers; calcium channel blockers (CCB); and thiazide diuretics.
Expert Consensus RecommendationsExpert consensus recommendations have expanded on hypertension management in NH populations, specifically in antihypertensive selection and intensity. An ESH-European Union Geriatric Medicine Society consensus statement asserted that, for adults 80 years or older, ACEi, thiazide diuretics, and CCB can be considered, and monotherapy with slow titration is recommended, especially for frail patients [14]. A 2014 consensus statement from the CRIME project (CRIteria to assess appropriate Medication use among Elderly complex patients) specifically recommended against more intensive control (BP target <140/90 mmHg) in adults with dementia, cognitive impairment, or limited functional status and against use of more than three antihypertensive agents due to reduced benefit and risk of adverse events [25]. More intensive control was also not recommended for those with limited life expectancy [25]. Finally, according to the Beer’s criteria, an expert consensus recommendation from the American Geriatrics Society, peripheral alpha-1 blockers should be avoided for treatment of hypertension due to higher risk of orthostatic hypotension compared to other antihypertensives [26]. Taken together, these expert consensus recommendations consistently suggest that less intensive BP control targets and de-intensified antihypertensive regimens are more appropriate for NH populations.
Randomized Controlled Trials (RCTs)Table 1 provides a summary of recent RCTs testing hypertension management approaches in older patients, with varying generalizability to NH residents.RCTs Comparing More Intensive vs. Less Intensive Control/BP TargetsA systematic review of past RCTs showed insufficient evidence to support more intensive control over higher BP targets among older adults [27]. Specifically, combining the results of three trials comparing BP targets of <160/90 mmHg or <150/90 mmHg versus a more intensive target of <140/90 mmHg showed no statistically significant difference in mortality, stroke, or combined cardiovascular events, although clinical extrapolation is limited due to high risk of bias and heterogeneity among these studies. However, the SPRINT trial was a pivotal study that shifted hypertension guidelines toward lower BP targets, specifically among ambulatory U.S. adults with increased CV risk, without diabetes, cognitive impairment, or history of stroke [18,28]. The sub-analysis of adults aged 75 years and older showed that more intensive control (SBP <120 mmHg compared to <140 mmHg) was associated with cardiovascular benefit and lower risk of all-cause mortality [18]. Follow-up studies of the SPRINT participants assessed other non-CV outcomes. Among SPRINT older adults, more intensive control was not associated with changes in gait speed or mobility, implying neither non-cardiovascular benefit nor harm [29]. Patient-reported outcomes (e.g. satisfaction with hypertension care, adherence to antihypertensives) were similar between BP target groups, both within those aged <75 years and 75 years and older [30]. In both SPRINT and HYVET participants, there was no evidence of effect modification by patient frailty, but the restrictive exclusion criteria used in these trials resulted in the exclusion of very frail older adults [18,31]. Therefore, the benefit of intensive control can only be inferred for populations reflecting fit, ambulatory older adults.The SPRINT trial excluded adults with a history of stroke [28], and there is generally a lack of available evidence regarding risks and benefits of more intensive control in older adults with a stroke history. One exception is the RESPECT study, a large RCT among Japanese, ambulatory adults aged 50–85 years with a history of stroke-related hospitalization, which included a stratified analysis for those 70–85 years old [32]. Among this older group, there was a non-significant, protective effect of more intensive BP control (<120/80 mmHg vs. <140/90 mmHg) on risk of recurrent stroke (hazard ratio [HR]=0.57, 95% confidence interval [CI] of 0.32–1.04 for a composite outcome of ischemic stroke and intracerebral hemorrhage) [32]. Two other trials examined the impact of more intensive control (<130 or <125 mmHg) compared to less intensive control (SBP <140 mmHg) in older adults with stroke history, but assessed changes in BP as primary endpoint [33,34]. “PAST-BP” was a trial among older adults in primary care settings within the United Kingdom which found no difference in systolic BP at follow-up. However, this study suffered from low statistical power overall and the small number of safety events (e.g., cardiovascular events) overall prohibited conclusions about effects on patient-centered outcomes [33]. PODCAST was a smaller trial among older adults, including those with cognitive impairment, and described a non-significant benefit in cognition (secondary endpoint) with more intensive BP control [34]. Clearly, there is a lack of RCTs powered to detect patient-centered outcomes (i.e., recurrent stroke with sub-analyses of stroke type, cognitive function) and representative of older adults in NH with a history of stroke and stroke-related cognitive impairment.RCTs Comparing Deprescribing of Antihypertensives vs. No DeprescribingOther RCTs (bottom of Table 1) have focused on interventions to de-intensify antihypertensive medications (i.e., “deprescribing” interventions) in patients with characteristics reflective of typical NH populations, including both patients with diagnosis of hypertension as well as patients with other CV indications for antihypertensive treatment. These deprescribing RCTs mainly assessed the impact of interventions to de-intensify antihypertensive medications on process measures such as number of antihypertensives and changes in BP, and less often examined patient-centered outcomes (e.g., CV events, mortality, adverse drug events). COSMOS included NH residents in Norway aged ≥65 years [35]. Compared to usual care, deprescribing rates were higher in the deprescribing intervention group, with no significant differences in secondary outcomes of changes in pulse or SBP among those deprescribed. The DANTE trial included ambulatory older adults aged 75 years and older with hypertension and mild cognitive impairment, the majority of which used diuretics and combination treatment with >2 antihypertensives [36]. The study showed that compared to usual care, deintensification or discontinuation of antihypertensives was associated with an increase in BP, but no harm or benefit in cognition or functional and psychological assessments at 16-weeks [36]. An ongoing study among ambulatory adults aged ≥80 years, OPTiMISE, will describe the impact of deprescribing antihypertensives compared to usual care in primary care settings on BP control at 12 weeks [37]. Clearly, there is a dearth of trial data on patient-centered outcomes of deprescribing antihypertensives in this population.Overall, most RCTs assessed CV endpoints and, with the exception of SPRINT [18], did not find a different in CV outcomes between more and less intensive control, among older ambulatory adults. In studies that showed a CV benefit, frailty did not modify effect, but very frail patients were not well-represented [18,31]. Most RCTs excluded NH residents as well as older adults who were very frail, cognitively impaired, or nearing the end-of-life, possibly due to ethical and feasibility challenges, thereby limiting their generalizability to NH residents [17]. Among deprescribing trials, there was notable effort to include NH populations, but greater emphasis on patient-centered outcomes (e.g., cognitive, functional, all-cause negative events) is needed to inform best practices for hypertension management.
Observational StudiesIn addition to RCTs, recent observational studies provid insight on hypertension management, specifically harm related to more intensive treatment within NH-representative populations. Such studies have important advantages with regard to external validity, in their purposeful inclusion of older patients that better represent typical characteristics of NH residents in terms of comorbidity burden, frailty, fall risk, cognitive impairment, and/or polypharmacy. However, because the “real-world” patients included in observational studies are not randomized to receive different BP targets or antihypertensive regimens of varying intensity, there is a greater potential for bias due to confounding. For example, providers may be inclined toward more intensive treatment and to avoid de-intensification in patients with the greatest CV risk, which could bias the relationship of more intensive treatment and CV risk upward. Or conversely, providers may be more likely to de-intensify antihypertensives in the frailest patients who are in the last months of life, which may bias the relationship of more intensive treatment and mortality downward. Ideally, such studies would follow best practices in employing strategies that reduce bias and emulate a randomized trial to the extent possible [38,39]. Here we review recent observational studies conducted with NH residents as well as non-NH residents with similar characteristics, as shown in Table 2, and briefly comment on potential for bias.Observational Studies Comparing Treatment IntensityTwo studies assessed the impact of treatment intensity on outcomes in NH settings. PARTAGE was a large, retrospective cohort analysis of NH residents aged ≥80 years which showed an association between more intensive BP targets and CV and non-CV related death within 2 years of follow-up [6]. Specifically, mortality rates were higher among residents with SBP < 130 mmHg who took at least two antihypertensives, compared to all other patient groups with higher BP levels and/or taking fewer medications [6]. However, this study had a limitation of potential residual confounding by baseline risk. Notably, the most intensely treated group exhibited a much higher baseline prevalence of CV risk factors and heart failure. Although in sensitivity analyses the researchers attempted to balance patient subgroups using propensity score matching (PSM), they did not report the extent to which this matching achieved balance on these factors. Thus, the increased risk seen in the group with the lowest BP levels and most intense BP regimens may still reflect greater baseline risk for CV events rather than intense BP treatment itself. Another study included Medicare beneficiaries in NHs and assessed the association between number of antihypertensives and CV and non-CV outcomes, stratified by diagnosis of dementia [8]. Higher treatment intensity was associated with incremental CV and non-CV harm but with no significant differences in mortality, and cognitive performance did not significantly modify these effects. However, dementia and worse performance status were significantly associated with less intensive treatment; therefore, harm was potentially biased towards the null, given possible residual confounding from lack of PSM and use of prevalent rather than new users. Also, this study used separate models to individually estimate risk of death, CV, and non-CV outcomes, and did not account for competing risks or differential censoring across those with higher intensity versus not lower treatment intensity, which could bias results.Other cohort studies among ambulatory older adults showed mixed results with regard to harms of more intensive hypertension management. These studies share a limitation that antihypertensive treatment intensity was measured as a time-invariant (stable) exposure; however, the intensity of antihypertensives likely varies over time. In addition, they did not employ new user designs, which may have the effect of underestimating harms associated with more intensive treatment that may be more likely soon after intensification. One Medicare claims study found increased fall risk with antihypertensive intensity [40]. Strengths of the study include PSM that balanced patients with different levels of antihypertensive intensity on measured demographic and clinical variables, as well as using survival analysis accounting for competing risks [40]. On the other hand, details on BP control levels were not available; thus the potential for differential effects of antihypertensive medication intensity by BP level (suggested by the Song et al. deintensification study discussed below [41]) was not examined. The Health ABC cohort study did not find an association between use of antihypertensives (measured by participant interview) with recurrent falls in the following year [42]. A strength was that this studied used varying definitions to categorize antihypertensive intensity. In a prospective cohort study patients aged 90 years and older in Jerusalem with hypertension, using (versus not using) antihypertensives was not associated with differences in mortality, functional decline, loss of muscle strength [43]. For both studies, a strength was that several patient-relevant demographics and outcomes were captured by patient interview and assessment, which helped to accurately capture baseline confounders.Observational Studies Comparing Treatment IntensificationOne national cohort study among older U.S. Veterans receiving care at the Veterans Health Administration (VA) also demonstrated that antihypertensive intensification at hospital discharge was associated with increased all-cause re-hospitalization rates and serious adverse events at 30-day follow-up, compared to no intensification [44]. At one year, there were no significant differences were found in cardiovascular events or change in SBP among those who did versus did not receive intensifications.. This study had several methodological strengths, including use of a new-user design and excellent balance on a large number of measured potential confounders after PSM. However, the relatively small effect sizes observed meant that the researchers could not rule out the possibility for confounding by an unmeasured variable.Observational Studies Comparing Treatment Deintensification/DeprescribingWe identified only one recent study, conducted in VA nursing homes, that directly examines the effect of deprescribing antihypertensives among those with a hypertension diagnosis in nursing home residents. After an index fall associated with low BP, deintensification was associated with a benefit of decreased likelihood of recurrent falls among those with the lowest BP ranges (80–100 mmHg), but also an increased risk of death in patients with SBP >100 mmHg to 120 mmHg, compared to those not deintensified [41]. Strengths of this study include a new-user design (i.e., deprescribing after incident falls), use of PSM to achieve covariate balance across treatment groups, and stratification by baseline SBP level. However, this study did not account for competing risks, which could bias the risk of recurrent falls associated with deintensification.Observational Studies Comparing Antihypertensive ClassesTwo recent observational studies assessed the effects of individual antihypertensive classes on harm. A population-based cohort study assessed the use of alpha-blockers (compared to other antihypertensives) and likelihood of severe hypotension and hypotension-related harm among older women with hypertension [45]. There was evidence of greater harm of alpha-blocker use within this population [45], which supports the Beer’s criteria statement against their use [26]. Possible sources of bias include lack of a new user design, lack of BP data, and confounding from changes in antihypertensive prescribing over time. In the previously mentioned Health ABC cohort study, ambulatory, older adults using a loop diuretic were found to have a modest increase in risk of recurrent falls (OR: 1.50, 95% CI 1.11–2.03) [42]. It is important to note that indications for and frequency of loop diuretic use are much different in NH populations (e.g., symptomatic treatment of heart failure, incontinence care and closer observation for falls) compared to ambulatory settings.Despite variations in methodological quality and results, these studies are suggestive of a trend of potential harms related to more intensive treatment of hypertension, especially among studies that follow best practices to minimize bias. Future studies employing observational designs should utilize new-user designs, well-described PSM, survival analyses accounting for competing risks, sensitivity analyses for different definitions of antihypertensive use and intensive BP treatment targets, and analyses to account for potential interactions between antihypertensive use and BP treatment targets.
Discussion
Recent studies have provided some insights in tailoring HTN management for NH residents, but substantial gaps remain in evidence. Overall, RCTs support more intensive BP control to achieve CV and non-CV benefits in ambulatory, healthier older adults, but these trials do not represent the NH population, especially those with history of stroke. The limited life expectancy of many in this population may translate into insufficient time available to experience CV benefits, but direct evidence to support or refute this possibility is unavailable. On the other hand, multiple observational studies suggest increased potential for serious adverse effects (e.g. falls) associated with more intensive antihypertensive treatment, but these studies vary in terms of their results as well as methodological quality. Therefore, the risk/benefits of more intensive management, including more aggressive BP targets and greater antihypertensive regimen intensity, among NH populations remain unclear and for the time being, should be considered on a patient-level basis with shared decision-making, as described in clinical guidelines.
Many RCTs directly testing the effects of de-intensifying antihypertensive regimens have focused primarily on BP changes as the primary outcome. This measure provides minimal value, as we expect discontinuation of antihypertensives to result in BP elevations. Instead, the clinically relevant question is whether these BP changes translate into increased CV, hospitalization or mortality risk, and whether reduced antihypertensive drug burden results in reduced adverse events such as falls. Therefore, we see the greatest value in the assessment of the patient-centered outcomes associated with antihypertensive deprescribing. The outcomes of cognitive, functional, and psychological changes within the DANTE trial are examples of relevant outcomes [36], but additional RCTs examining a wider range of patient-centered outcomes are needed.
Overall, the observational studies in this review have included relevant outcomes but are subject to biases from residual confounding and measurement error (e.g. hypertension diagnoses, comorbidities, concomitant medications, measures of antihypertensive burden, lack of time-varying exposures and covariates). Also, many of these studies assume that outcomes are consistent regardless of the type of antihypertensive deprescribed, which is unlikely given that antihypertensives are used for various other CV and renal indications. Notably, no antihypertensive deprescribing studies used an active comparator (i.e., deprescribing of another class of drugs not expected to affect the outcome of interest) and negative outcome control to help reduce bias, such as increased surveillance for medication-related problems or confounding by indication [38,39]. Investigators can consider incorporating active comparators (e.g. deprescribing of other drug classes), negative outcome control, and describing the antihypertensives that are de-intensified or discontinued. We also recommend sensitivity analyses addressing alternative definitions of antihypertensive medication intensity and BP treatment targets, given the lack of consensus in this area. Lastly, NH populations are heterogenous, and we believe it is beneficial to stratify by subpopulations of interest, where possible (e.g., very frail, high-fall risk, cognitively impaired, CV comorbidities, and/or limited life expectancy).
Conclusion
In summary, the evidence regarding optimal BP treatment targets and antihypertensive regimen intensity in NH residents is still emerging. Additional RCTs and rigorous observational studies examining effects of de-intensified BP management on patient-centered outcomes in complex, older populations that address the limitations described in this article are needed to inform improved guidelines and treatment for NH residents.
