Introduction
Many mammalian species can generate a set of distinct gaits for moving over diverse terrain, and at various speeds (Hildebrand, 1989). Both spinal and intact cats shift from trotting to galloping with increased treadmill speed (Forssberg et al., 1980a), showing that gait changes can be performed by isolated spinal locomotor networks, and that locomotor speed is an important component in determining gait. Mice use a trotting gait, with regular alternation of opposing left and right limbs, during both over-ground and treadmill locomotion, over their entire range of speeds (Herbin et al., 2007). Mice with mutations in ephrinB3/EphA4 hop at all speeds (Kullander et al., 2003) suggesting that the inability of mice to switch gait at various locomotor speeds is limited by neural rather than biomechanical constraints.
The spinal circuits that govern gait changes at different speeds have not been characterized in mammals. Larval zebrafish, juvenile reef fishes, frogs, and salamanders alternate fins or limbs during slow speeds but use synchronous limb movements or axial body undulations to propel themselves at high speeds (Chevallier et al., 2008; Hale et al., 2006; Nauwelaerts, 2002; Thorsen et al., 2004). In zebrafish, different sets of spinal neurons become active during slow and fast swimming (Kimura et al., 2006; Liao and Fetcho, 2008; McLean et al., 2007; McLean et al., 2008). The speed-dependent recruitment of neurons has been confirmed for two excitatory interneurons types (McLean et al., 2008). One of these interneuron subtypes, called CiD, is marked by expression of the alx gene (Kimura et al., 2006). However, the precise function of CiD interneurons in the zebrafish spinal cord is not known.
In the mouse spinal cord, a class of interneurons called V2a neurons expresses Chx10, a homolog of the zebrafish alx gene. The genetic cascade for the development of alx-expressing interneurons in the zebrafish and V2a interneurons in the mouse spinal cord has been conserved during evolution (Peng et al., 2007). In the mouse, genetic ablation of V2a neurons (Chx10∷DTA mice; (Crone et al., 2008)) results in deficits in consistent left-right alternation during fictive locomotion (Crone et al., 2008). How the function of V2a interneurons might change with locomotor speed in adult mice was not examined, as the BL6 strain of mice, expressing DTA inV2a neurons invariably died shortly after birth, due to respiratory distress (Crone et al., 2008).
Here we make use of genetic variation in different mouse strains to avert the neonatal lethality after targeted ablation of V2a neurons. In the mixed ICR/BL6/129 genetic background where wild type mice maintain left-right alternation through all speeds of locomotion, we find that left-right alternation is progressively lost and replaced by synchronous galloping as Chx10∷DTA mice run faster. We show that the switch in gait at faster speeds is a function of the loss of spinal V2a interneurons, since in isolated spinal cords from neonatal Chx10∷DTA mice, normal left-right alternation is also weakened and replaced by left-right synchrony at higher frequencies of motor activity compared to lower frequencies. These data show that V2a interneurons in the lower spinal cord are responsible for maintaining left-right alternation, but only at faster speeds of locomotion.
Methods
Ethics statementAll animal care was performed in accordance to the University of Chicago Animal Care and Use Committee and the Cornell Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee, in accordance with NIH guidelines.
Transgenic animalsGeneration of Chx10∷DTA mice and genotyping protocols are described in (Crone, 2008). Breeding was performed as follows: prm-Cre; chx10∷LNL∷DTA male mice, on a mixed C57/BL6 and 129/S6/SvEv (ES cell component) genetic background, were bred to ICR females to produce heterozygous offspring with a single copy of the recombined chx10∷DTA allele (Chx10∷DTA mice) or homozygous littermates with two wild type chx10 alleles (wild type littermates). Less than 2% of offspring from this breeding contain a non-recombined chx10∷LNL∷DTA allele, and these mice were not included in this study.
ImmunohistochemistryNeonatal (P0) pups were anaesthetized and perfused with 4% paraformaldehyde, brains and spinal cords were dissected out, post-fixed for 2 hrs in 4% paraformaldehyde, and washed overnight in phosphate buffered saline. Tissue was cryoprotected in 30% sucrose for 2-4 hours and mounted in OCT medium (Tissue Tek, Torrance, CA) for cryosectioning. Transverse sections (14 μm) of lumbar spinal cord or medulla were stained with antibodies to Chx10 (guinea pig, 1:10,000) (Thaler et al., 1999) or GATA 2/3 (guinea pig, 1:8,000) according to the methods described in (Peng et al., 2007). Biotinylated secondary antibodies (Donkey, 1:500) followed by ABC amplification (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA) and DAB color reaction (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) were used visualize staining. Slides were dehydrated in graded concentrations of ethanol, then xylenes, and mounted in Permount media (Fisher Scientific, Fair Lawn, NJ). Images were obtained with a Zeiss Axioplan II microscope, a Zeiss axiocam digital camera and analyzed with OpenLab 3.1 software (Improvision, Waltham, MA).
AChE histochemistryHistochemical staining for AChE was performed on hindbrain sections to identify those containing the nucleus ambiguus. Slides were incubated at 37° C for 7 hr. in a solution containing 0.2mM ethopropazine-HCl, 10mM glycine, 2mM cupric sulfate, 65mM sodium acetate (pH5.5), and 4mM acetylthiocholine iodide. The color reaction was then performed in 1.25% sodium sulfide (pH 6.0) for 8 min. Slides were rinsed 8× in PBS, dehydrated in graded concentrations of ethanol, then xylenes, and mounted in Permount media (Fisher Scientific).
Neuron countsThe number of neurons positive for Chx10 or GATA3 nuclear staining was counted on the left and right sides of 10-12 lumbar sections (14 μm) for four wild-type and four Chx10∷DTA animals and the average number of neurons per hemisection was calculated for each animal. The number of neurons positive for Chx10 or GATA3 nuclear staining was counted on the left and right sides of 5-6 medulla sections (14 μm) adjacent to sections containing the nucleus ambiguus (as determined by AChE histochemistry) for three wild-type and three Chx10∷DTA animals and the average number of neurons per hemisection was calculated for each animal.
Gait analysisThe DigiGait instrument (Mouse Specifics, Inc., Boston, MA) was used to analyze gait in 11 Chx10∷DTA and 11 wild type littermates age P24-25. The hind and fore paws of mice were painted with red food coloring (McCormick, Hunt Valley, MD) to enhance visual contrast. Each animal was allowed to run on a clear treadmill belt (with a digital camera underneath to record paw placement) at speeds of 15, 25, 35, 45, 55, 65, 75, 85, and 95 centimeters per second (cm/s). Mice were placed on stationary treadmill, which was then accelerated to the test speed. Ten trials were attempted at each speed, and successful trials (in which the animal was able to maintain treadmill speed for >3 s) were counted and recorded with digital video (135 frames/s). Mice were rested at least 10 s between trials (of ∼5 s each) and at least 60 min after 30 trials to prevent tiring. For each animal, one trial (500 frames of video) at each speed was selected for analysis in which the animal maintained constant position on the treadmill belt. DigiGait software was used to identify stance and swing phases for all four limbs in every video frame, and to measure average values for stride length and stride frequency, as well as duration of stride, stance, and swing for each limb. Gait diagrams were produced using Excel (Microsoft, Seattle, WA) based on frame by frame stance and swing data provided by DigiGait software. The hindlimb phase was calculated for each step by dividing the time between the start of the right and left hindlimb stance divided by the duration of the right hindlimb step cycle (see Figure 4A). Circular analysis of hindlimb phase was performed by representing each step as a unit vector with radius (R) =1 and direction determined by the phase value (radians= 2π × phase value). Each trial is represented by a vector (whose endpoint is represented as a dot in circular plots) which is the average vector for the steps in that trial. Trial vectors with R values near 1 (outer circle) represent trials in which all the steps have a consistent phase value, whereas trials with R values near 0 (center of circle) show no preferred phase value. Group vectors were averages of the vectors for all mice that attained a given speed. Statistical comparisons of R values were made using the Mann-Whitney U test as described by Zar (2000).
Whole-cord preparationsExperiments were performed with neonatal [postnatal day (P) 0–2] Chx10∷DTA mice or wild type littermates. The dissection was performed similar to that described previously (Zhong et al., 2007). Briefly, neonatal mice were decapitated and eviscerated in cold oxygenated (95% O2 and 5% CO2) low-calcium Ringer solution composed of 111 mM NaCl, 3.08 mM KCl, 25 mM NaHCO3, 1.18 mM KH2PO4, 3.5 mM MgSO4, 0.25 mM CaCl2, and 11 mM glucose. The spinal cord, extending from T8/T9 to S3/4, was then dissected out and pinned ventral-side-up in a recording chamber superfused with oxygenated normal Ringer's solution composed of 111 mM NaCl, 3.08 mM KCl, 25 mM NaHCO3, 1.18 mM KH2PO4, 1.25 mM MgSO4, 2.52 mM CaCl2, and 11 mM glucose. In some experiments, the caudal end of the spinal cord was dissected and locomotor-like activity was reliably induced by stimulating the entire caudal end of the spinal cord (Gordon and Whelan, 2006; Whelan et al., 2000; Zhong et al., 2007). Constant current stimulus trains (0.1–1 mA, 2–2.5 Hz for 15-30 s) were delivered through a suction electrode. Ventral root recordings were bandpass filtered (100 Hz to 1 kHz) and recorded using an alternating current amplifier (model 1600; A-M Systems, Carlsborg, WA). All experiments were performed at room temperature.
Ventral root recordingsSuction electrodes were placed on the left and right L2 (lL2 and rL2) and left and right L5 (lL5 and rL5) ventral roots. Locomotor activity was evoked by perfusing Ringer's solution containing a combination of N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) (Sigma; 4-10 μM) and serotonin creatine sulfate (5-HT; 4-10 μM). No pronounced differences in locomotor-like activity were observed over the postnatal ages used (P0–P2). Rhythmic burst activity from ventral roots was bandpass-filtered (100 Hz to 1 kHz). Locomotor-like activity was analyzed using two different methods: (i) statistical measure of the lL2/rL2 and lL2/lL5 coordination by using circular statistics and (ii) autocorrelation analysis from L2 ventral roots and cross-correlation analysis from lL2/rL2 and lL2/lL5 ventral roots.
Circular analysisCircular statistics were used to determine the significance of the phasing relationship between left-right and flexor-extensor motor bursts (Kjaerulff and Kiehn, 1996; Zar, 2000). Clampfit 9.0, Excel, and Spike 2 (Cambridge Electronic Design, Cambridge, UK) were used for data analysis. The direction of a vector represents the average preferred phase of the ventral root motoneuron burst, whereas its length, R, is a measure of statistical significance of the preferred phase. Vectors with a phase of 0.5 or 0 corresponded to alternation or synchronization between the two ventral roots. p values for the significance of R were calculated as described by Kjaerulff and Kiehn (1996) and Zar (2000).
Correlation analysisThe ventral root extracellular data were integrated and smoothed with a time constant of 0.2s and analyzed using custom written programs in Spike 2 (Cambridge Electronic Design, Cambridge, UK). The phase relationship between the flexor and extensor activity was quantified by cross-correlation analysis, while the rhythmicity of the flexor bursts was tested by auto-correlation analysis. At least 10 min of data were analyzed for each measurement. These were subdivided into time segments of 20 s each for the correlation analyses. Auto-correlations or cross correlations were computed for at least 20 time segments. The mean and standard error (SE) values were obtained from the entire set. Ventral root activity was considered significantly rhythmic if the peak next to the center of the average auto-correlation exceeded four times the SE of the entire set (Kremer and Lev-Tov, 1997). Ventral root activity from one root was considered significantly correlated to the opposite ventral root if the central peak of the average cross-correlation exceeded four times the SE (Kremer and Lev-Tov, 1997). A positive value for the peak near zero in the cross-correlation indicates that the two signals are relatively in phase, whereas a negative value indicates that they are relatively out of phase. The exact phase relationship was measured by the circular analysis.
Results
Postnatal survival of Chx10∷DTA mice is strain-dependentThe phenotypic variability of transgenic mice is often affected by genetic variability among different mouse strains. In our earlier study (Crone et al., 2008), all the progeny of wild type inbred BL6 dams that receive a copy of the recombined Chx10∷DTA allele from male BL6/129 mice died before three days of postnatal life, likely due to respiratory difficulty (see methods for details of breeding strategies and various mouse strains). We asked whether the genetic background of the dam could improve the survival of progeny that carry a copy of the recombined Chx10∷DTA allele. We tested the survival of progeny from dams of the ICR strain mated to BL6/129 males. In survival studies, 40% (31/78) of the progeny of ICR dams that carried one copy of the Chx10∷DTA allele survived past 3 weeks of age. The other 60% progeny of the ICR dams died within 3 days of birth. These data suggest that genetic variability between the BL6 and ICR dams is sufficient to overcome neonatal lethality in a significant proportion of mice that express DTA in V2a neurons.We asked whether the survival of the progeny of ICR dams resulted from variability in the expression of DTA, and incomplete ablation of V2a neurons. We counted the number of surviving V2a neurons in the lumbar spinal cord, as well as the medulla of new born progeny of ICR and BL6 dams mated to Chx10∷DTA BL6/129 male mice. The lumbar cord and medulla are the sites of locomotor and respiratory central pattern generators, respectively. Progeny of ICR dams show an almost complete ablation of Chx10 neurons in the lumbar spinal cord (Figure 1; 40.3 ± 2.1 cells/hemisection in wild type, 0.88 ± 0.07 cells/hemisection in Chx10∷DTA, P = 0.0003) and in the medulla at the level of pre-Bötzinger complex, where respiratory rhythm is generated (Figure 1; 111.3 ± 6.9 cells/hemisection in wild type, 2.2 ± 0.3 cells/hemisection in Chx10∷DTA, P = 0.004). Next we asked whether the loss of V2a neurons resulted in an unexpected, compensatory change in other cell types. We examined expression of the transcription factor GATA-3 in Chx10∷DTA and wild type animals at P0. GATA-3 marks the V2b interneurons in the ventral spinal cord and medulla that are derived from the P2 progenitor domain, like the V2a Chx10 interneurons, (Peng et al., 2007). We did not detect any change in the number or location of GATA-3 interneurons in the lumbar spinal cord or medulla of Chx10∷DTA mice compared to wild type littermates (Figure 1; Spinal cord: 20.5 ± 0.6 cells/hemisection in wild type, 21.2 ± 0.8 cells/hemisection in Chx10∷DTA, P = 0.50. Medulla: 99.9 ± 7.7 cells/hemisection in wild type, 93.8 ± 7.2 cells/hemisection in Chx10∷DTA, P = 0.60). These data demonstrate that efficiency and selectivity of ablation of Chx10 neurons in ICR dams is comparable in the progeny of BL6 dams that we reported earlier, where ablation of the Chx10 neurons did not change the number of Evx1+ (V0), En1+ (V1), GATA3+ (V2b), Sim1+ (V3) interneuron subtypes or HB9+ motor neurons (Crone et al., 2008). Thus, those Chx10∷DTA mice that are derived from ICR dams and survive to adulthood are a suitable model to test the functions of V2a neurons in adult locomotion.
Locomotor activity in the absence of V2a interneuronsChx10∷DTA mice that died within the first three days of birth were indistinguishable during that period from those that ultimately survived. Within the first week, the surviving Chx10∷DTA mice were significantly smaller than their littermates that did not inherit a recombined Chx10∷DTA allele. By P24/25, Chx10-DTA mice weigh 40% less than their wild type littermates (Wild type 17.67grams±0.46, n=11; Chx10-DTA 10.72grams±0.64, n=11). No obvious differences in the home cage locomotor activity were noticeable between Chx10∷DTA mice and wild type controls. Chx10∷DTA animals appeared to walk normally and were able to engage in all normal activities.Since V2a-like interneurons have been implicated in slow as well as fast locomotor activity in the zebrafish (McLean et al., 2008), we tested the ability of Chx10∷DTA mice to run on a treadmill at various speeds. Age P24/25 Chx10∷DTA and wild type littermates were allowed to run at constant speed on a clear treadmill belt while digital video was recorded from underneath the treadmill to mark when each of the four limbs was in contact with the treadmill belt. DigiGait software was used to measure the average stride length and frequency for each limb, as well as the duration of stride, stance and swing phases. Locomotion studies were performed at P24/25 because the stride parameters are established in their adult form by this age (Clarke and Still, 2001). Each animal attempted ten trials at speeds incrementing by 10 cm/s between 25 cm/s and 95 cm/s; one trial at each speed in which the animal maintained constant position on the treadmill was selected for analysis.Despite a smaller body size, many Chx10∷DTA mice were capable of achieving speeds as fast or faster than wild type mice (Figure 2A). Commensurate with smaller body size, Chx10∷DTA mice have a shorter stride but take faster steps to run at the same speed as the littermate controls (Figure 2B-C). As in the control mice, the step duration decreases as Chx10∷DTA mice run at faster speeds and most of the decrease is due to shorter stance phase, whereas the swing phase is unaltered (Figure 2D). These data indicate that the loss of V2a interneurons in the Chx10∷DTA mice does not significantly alter their ability to run at a wide range of speeds. The individual limb step cycle parameters are also preserved in the absence of V2a neurons, and Chx10∷DTA mice selectively shorten the stance phase as the speed increases, like their littermate controls. These data indicate that despite their smaller size, Chx10∷DTA mice retain many features of the normal step cycle during treadmill locomotion. However, their gaits are markedly different.
Speed-dependent gait change from left-right alternation to synchrony in Chx10∷DTA miceIn the normal adult mouse, left-right coordination is an important characteristic of the gait at all speeds. Left-right coordination is perturbed during fictive locomotion in spinal cords isolated from neonatal Chx10∷DTA mice (Crone et al., 2008). We used DigiGait to analyze the relative position of fore and hind paws as Chx10∷DTA and wild type mice ran in place on a treadmill moving at various speeds. As expected, the gait pattern of wild type mice consists of strict alternation between left and right fore and hind legs at slow (25 cm/s) and fast (85 cm/s) treadmill speeds (Figure 3; Supplementary Video). At slow speed (25 cm/s) the gait pattern of Chx10∷DTA mice also shows normal alternation between left and right forelegs and the left and right hindlegs (Figure 3; Supplementary Video). However, at high speeds, Chx10∷DTA mice show a “galloping” gait in which the left and right forelegs as well as left and right hindlegs move synchronously in the same phase (Figure 3; Supplementary Video). At both speeds, wild type as well as Chx10∷DTA mice alternate movements of the fore and hind legs on the same side (Figure 3; Supplementary Video). These results demonstrate a speed-dependent disruption of left-right alternation of the fore and hind legs in Chx10∷DTA mice, resulting in the expression of a novel “galloping” gait in the absence of the V2a interneurons.To test whether the transition from the trotting to the galloping gait is gradual, we analyzed left and right hind leg coordination at speeds ranging from 25-95 cm/s. Phase differences between left and right legs range from 0 to 1.0 where values close to 0.5 represent alternation (Figure 4A). Examples of the phase values for hind legs of a wild type and a Chx10∷DTA mouse during 20 consecutive steps at 25, 45, 65, and 85 cm/s are shown in Figure 4B. The wild type mouse maintains phase values close to 0.5 (alternation) during treadmill locomotion at all speeds. The phase values close to 0.5 are also maintained by the Chx10∷DTA mouse at moderate speeds of 25 and 45 cm/s. However, at a faster speed of 65 cm/s, the Chx10∷DTA mouse fails to maintain a constant phase difference as hind legs move in and out of phase on a step-by-step basis. At the fastest speed tested, 85 cm/s, this Chx10∷DTA mouse stabilizes its gait with consistent synchronous movement of left and right hind legs. The summary of data from all mice is shown in circular plots of phase difference (Figure 4C and 4D), illustrating the change in gait as speed is increased for Chx10∷DTA mice (n=11; Fig 4D) but not wild type (n=11;Fig. 4C) mice. The phase is indicated by direction on circular plots, while the consistency of the phase value (R value) is indicated by distance from the center. At low speeds (25-45 cm/s), all mice show consistent hind leg alternation with no significant difference between the R values of trials from Chx10∷DTA and wild type mice (Mann-Whitney U test: P> 0.05; U= 480; n=33 wild type, 31 Chx10∷DTA trials). However, at moderate speeds (55-65 cm/s) Chx10∷DTA mice show much less consistent alternation than wild type mice, as indicated by an average R value significantly lower for Chx10-DTA than wild type mice (Mann-Whitney U test: P< 0.01; U= 53; n=19 wild type, 16 Chx10∷DTA trials). At fast speeds, a synchronous galloping gait was observed in 2 of 7, 1 of 5, 3 of 4, and 2 of 2 Chx10∷DTA mice running at 65 cm/s, 75 cm/s, 85 cm/s, and 95 cm/s, respectively, but never in wild type mice. These data demonstrate a gradual shift from trotting to irregular gait to galloping gait as Chx10∷DTA mice run on a treadmill at increasing speeds.We next grouped the trials according to stride frequency (steps/s) in order to compare hind limb alternation between wild type mice and the smaller Chx10∷DTA littermates moving their limbs at the same rate (Supplementary figure). A rate of 7 steps/s was chosen to divide the wild type trials into slow (<7 steps/s; n= 31 trials) and fast groups (7-9 steps/s; n= 32 trials). Trials from Chx10∷DTA mice were likewise grouped into slow (<7 steps/s; n= 15) and fast (7-9 steps/s; n=29) groups, as well as an additional group (>9 steps/s; n= 14) that is faster than any wild type trial. Wild type mice consistently alternate their hind limbs at both slow and fast stride frequencies. Chx10∷DTA mice exhibit consistent alternation at stride frequencies less than 7 steps/s, less consistent alternation at 7-9 steps/s, and inconsistent alternation or synchronous hind limb movement at stride frequencies greater than 9 steps/s. Importantly, trials from Chx10∷DTA mice exhibit a significantly lower R value than trials from wild type mice when running at 7-9 steps/s (Mann-Whitney U test: P< 0.05; U= 305; n=32 wild type, 29 Chx10∷DTA trials), but do not show significantly different R values at stride frequencies less than 7 steps/s (Mann-Whitney U test: P> 0.05; U= 150; n=31 wild type, 15 Chx10∷DTA trials). These results confirm a gradual decrease in the ability of Chx10∷DTA mice to maintain strict hind limb alternation with increasing step cycle frequency that is not observed in wild type mice.
Spinal origin of speed dependent gait transition in Chx10∷DTA miceWe next asked whether the galloping gait, observed in Chx10∷DTA mice running on a fast-moving treadmill, results from the absence of local V2a interneurons in the lumbar spinal cord. Previously, we found that spinal cords isolated from neonatal Chx10∷DTA mice can be induced to generate a locomotor-like rhythm with NMDA and 5-HT (Crone et al., 2008). We analyzed the regularity of L2 ventral root rhythmic bursting cycle frequency using autocorrelation analysis during fictive locomotion evoked by 6μM NMDA and 6μM 5-HT. As previously reported (Crone et al., 2008), the Chx10∷DTA rhythmic activity was less regular as reflected in the lower value of the autocorrelation coefficient (Wild type: 0.72±0.12; n=31; Chx10∷DTA: 0.37±19; n=56: P<0.001). Interestingly, 32 out of 56 Chx10∷DTA spinal cords generated relatively normal alternating locomotor-like activity, characterized by statistically significant left-right as well as ipsilateral flexor-extensor alternations, although the strength of the alternating cross-correlation values was somewhat weaker than the controls, (Fig. 5G). This was especially true at lower cycle frequencies, when the burst frequency was less than 0.3 Hz. Figure 5a-c shows a Chx10∷DTA spinal cord that generated a relatively slow fictive locomotor pattern comparable to wild type spinal cords, and which shows normal left-right and ipsilateral flexor-extensor alternation. However, the phase between left-right flexor bursts was not stable in 24 Chx10∷DTA spinal cords. In some Chx10∷DTA cords, we noted continuous shifting of the left-right phase from alternation to synchronization and back to alternation while the flexor-extensor alternation was well maintained (data not shown). Moreover, in three Chx10∷DTA spinal cords with relatively high burst frequencies, the left-right phase showed a predominantly synchronized pattern. Figure 5d-f illustrates an example of a Chx10∷DTA spinal cord that generated relatively high frequency rhythmic activity in the presence of NMDA and 5-HT, with synchronized left-right activity. The synchronized left-right burst pattern is indicated by the positive value in the left-right crosscorrelogram (Figure 5E) and the mean phase vector in the circular plot (Figure 5F) which points near to zero, while the flexor-extensor alternating phase was relatively well retained.These data suggested that the choice between alternation and synchronous activation of left and right L2 roots depends on the frequency of the motor burst activity induced by NMDA and 5-HT. We tested this hypothesis by determining whether there is a significant relationship between the left-right phase (measured by the value of the cross-correlation coefficient), and the burst frequency. As shown in Figure 5G, linear regression analysis of this relationship showed that in the wild type spinal cord, there is no significant relationship between burst frequency and left-right phase (n=31, r=0.067; p>0.1). This confirms that the wild type cord generates locomotor-like activity with strict left-right alternation at all burst frequencies. In contrast, there was a statistically significant positive relationship between burst frequency and the left-right cross correlation coefficient in the Chx10∷DTA spinal cords during locomotion induced by 6μM NMDA and 6μM 5-HT (n=56; r=0.57; p<0.001). As the burst frequency increases, the left-right phase changes from alternating to poor left-right coordination and finally to predominantly synchronized activity. Thus, unlike the wild type cord, the degree and the sign of left-right coordination varies with fictive locomotor speed, just as was seen during locomotion in the intact mouse. We also analyzed the relationship between burst frequency and ipsilateral flexor-extensor phase in the wild type and Chx10∷DTA spinal cords, but no significant relationship was found in either strain, demonstrating that flexor-extensor phasing is maintained at all frequencies. These results demonstrate that Chx10∷DTA spinal cords can generate relatively normal phasing of fictive locomotion at lower burst frequencies, but the left-right phase shifts toward synchronization at high burst frequencies.
Speed-dependent, reversible shift in left-right coordination of motor activity in individual Chx10∷DTA spinal cordsTo further explore the changes in left-right phasing with frequency in Chx10∷DTA cords, we took advantage of the fact that higher concentrations of NMDA and 5-HT can reversibly evoke somewhat higher frequencies of fictive locomotion. The threshold for drug-induced rhythmic activity was tested in spinal cords isolated from wild type and Chx10∷DTA mice. In both mice, 5μM NMDA and 5μM 5-HT (5:5 = NMDA:5-HT) reliably evoked stable rhythmic ventral root bursting, while lower concentrations (2:2 or 4:4) failed to do so (wild type: n=8; Chx10∷DTA: n=8). These results suggest that the transmitter threshold for the network to generate rhythmic activity is not significantly altered in Chx10∷DTA mice. This allowed us examine frequency-dependent changes in left-right phasing within a single cord as different concentrations of NMDA and 5-HT were applied. We analyzed the left-right and flexor-extensor phase relationship at different frequencies using cross-correlation and circular plot analysis.As expected, cords from the wild type mice continue to show strong left-right and flexor-extensor alternation as frequency is accelerated by increasing the NMDA:5-HT concentration from 6:6 μM to 10:10 μM (data not shown). The Chx10∷DTA spinal cords also accelerate their burst frequency with elevated NMDA and 5-HT, and this effect is reversible (Figure 6A). The ipsilateral flexor-extensor relationship is well maintained at the elevated frequency, as analyzed with cross correlation and circular analysis (Figure 6B and 6C). However, the left-right phase is more significantly disturbed when the burst frequency is high. As illustrated in Figure 6B, the value at zero of the crosscorrelogram is less negative at the higher frequency when the burst frequency is higher. Circular analysis shows that the left-right phase loses its significant alternation at the higher frequency; this reverses upon return to 6:6μM NMDA and 5-HT (Figure 6B and 6C). Figure 6D summarizes the changes in left-right cross-correlation coefficient as a function of frequency in four Chx10∷DTA cords compared to two wild type cords. In all four Chx10∷DTA cords, the left-right phase becomes less negative and less regular when the burst frequency is elevated by high NMDA and 5-HT, while no such change is seen in the wild type spinal cords (Figure 6D, left). In both wild type and Chx10∷DTA spinal cords, the increase of burst frequency has no effect on the ipsilateral flexor-extensor phase relationship (Figure 6D, right). Our results suggest that a single Chx10∷DTA spinal cord can exhibit poorer alternation as the burst frequency increases, consistent with behavioral data showing that the Chx10∷DTA mice generate different gaits at different speeds.
“Fictive galloping” induced by sacral nerve cord stimulation in isolated Chx10∷DTA spinal cordWhile fictive locomotion can be evoked by bath application of NMDA and 5-HT, it is a somewhat artificial method that will depolarize virtually all the neurons in the cord. Increasing the speed with increased levels of transmitters accentuates this problem, so we looked for additional ways to evoke high-speed fictive locomotion in isolated spinal cords. Bouts of fictive locomotion can be evoked by more natural stimuli such as sensory nerve or hindbrain stimulation. We have studied fictive locomotion in wild type animals evoked by stimulation of the sacral end of the spinal cord (Zhong et al., 2007; Whelan et al., 2000; Gordon and Whelan, 2006), and asked whether this method also works in the Chx10∷DTA cord. In both wild type and Chx10-DTA spinal cords, low-frequency tonic caudal cord stimulation evoked short bouts of relatively high-frequency rhythmic activity from the L2 (flexor-dominated) and L5 (extensor-dominated) ventral roots (Figure 7A). The average frequency evoked by caudal cord stimulation in both wild-type cords (0.55±0.08 Hz, n=7) and Chx10∷DTA cords (0.67±0.15 Hz, n=8) are at the highest end of the range we could achieve with drug stimulation (compare with Figure 5G). The burst frequency evoked by caudal cord stimulation in Chx10-DTA spinal cords was slightly but significantly higher than the wild type spinal cords (P<0.05). This is reflected in a plot of burst frequency with step cycle from a typical wild type and a Chx10-DTA spinal cord (Figure 7D). Thus, caudal cord stimulation provides an independent way of achieving higher frequency fictive locomotion in both wild type and Chx10∷DTA spinal cords, allowing us to test whether galloping-like, fictive locomotion can be evoked by synaptic input in the absence of V2a interneurons.In the wild type spinal cord, a normal locomotor-like pattern, characterized by both left-right and ipsilateral flexor-extensor alternation, was always evoked by sacral cord stimulation (Figure 7A). When the data were analyzed by circular plot analyses, the average left-right phase was 0.46±0.07 (n=7), while the ipsilateral flexor-extensor phase was 0.49±0.06 (n=7) in the wild type spinal cords (Figures 7B and 7C, white arrows). A very different motor pattern was evoked by caudal cord stimulation in the Chx10∷DTA spinal cords (Figure 7A). The ipsilateral flexor-extensor activity showed normal alternation, with an average phase of 0.55±0.08 (n=5) (Figure 7C, black arrow). However, the left and right L2 roots showed a strongly synchronous bursting pattern (Figure 7A) with an average left-right phase of 0.95±0.12 in the Chx10∷DTA spinal cords (n=8) (Figure 7B, black arrow). Using Watson's U2 test for statistical significance of phase differences (Zar, 2000), the synchronous left-right phase in Chx10∷DTA spinal cords was significantly different from the alternating phase in wild type spinal cords (U2 (7, 8)=0.345; P<0.005) but the ipsilateral alternating flexor-extensor phases were not different between the two strains (U2(7, 5)=0.134; P>0.1). These results show that during high-speed fictive locomotion evoked by synaptic drive, the Chx10∷DTA spinal cord generates synchronous “galloping” rhythmic activity from the lumbar ventral roots, rather than the normal left-right alternation seen in wild type cords.
Discussion
Although atypical for mice, the switch from alternation to synchronous movement of the left and the right legs at higher speeds is the normal gait pattern for many animals. This study provides direct experimental evidence that interneurons in the spinal cord play an important role in speed-dependent change in gait. Transgenic mice (Chx10∷DTA mice) in which V2a interneurons are ablated show normal trotting gait at slow speeds, but transition to a galloping gait as speed increases. Although left-right limb coordination is altered in Chx10∷DTA mice at fast speed, alternation of fore and hind legs and the relative duration of swing and stance phases for individual limbs is unchanged compared to wild type mice. The speed dependent switch from left-right alternation towards synchrony is recapitulated during drug-induced locomotion in spinal cords isolated from neonatal Chx10∷DTA mice, and at the highest speeds of fictive locomotion evoked by tonic stimulation of the caudal end of the spinal cord. This occurs despite the large differences in locomotor cycle frequency in vivo and in vitro. These experiments suggest that spinal V2a interneurons are required for maintaining normal left-right alternation, but only at fast speeds.
Genetic background and neonatal lethality in the absence of V2a interneuronsTo study treadmill locomotion in an intact mouse, it was necessary to rescue the neonatal lethality previously reported for Chx10∷DTA mice on a mixed BL6/129 genetic background (Crone, 2008). Mouse strain differences are known to impact respiratory stability in the mouse (Han and Strohl, 2000; Han et al., 2001; Han et al., 2002; Schlenker et al., 2006), and BL6 mice have a predisposition to irregular breathing and apneas (Stettner et al., 2008). We decided to intercross the Chx10∷DTA males with ICR females, and found increased survival (40%) in Chx10∷DTA offspring on this mixed ICR/BL6/129 genetic background. Importantly, survival of Chx10∷DTA mice is not due to ineffective neuronal ablation, as V2a neurons are nearly absent from both the spinal cord and medulla in both strains of mice. The ablation appears specific for V2a neurons in Chx10∷DTA mice produced by both ICR dams and BL6 dams (this study and (Crone, 2008)). When treated neonatally with naloxone, some of the Chx10∷DTA mice produced by BL6 dams survive; they show the same locomotor phenotype of normal alternating locomotion at low speeds and synchronized “galloping” at high speeds as mice produced by ICR dams (data not shown). Further, the phenotype observed during transmitter-induced fictive locomotion is identical in isolated neonatal spinal cord preparations from Chx10∷DTA mice from ICR and BL6 dams.
V2a interneurons are dispensable for locomotor rhythm generation and for flexor-extensor coordinationIn vivo, mature Chx10∷DTA mice spontaneously initiate open field locomotion and locomote appropriately on a treadmill. During treadmill runs, Chx10∷DTA mice exhibit regular alternation of swing and stance phase. This finding is consistent with the observations in isolated spinal cord preparations that both electrically and chemically induced locomotor rhythms show normal alternation of ipsilateral flexor (L2) and extensor (L5) ventral roots in both Chx10∷DTA and wild type mice. An important characteristic of locomotion is preferential shortening of the extensor phase with increases in speed (Clarke and Still, 1999; Juvin et al., 2007; Kriellaars et al., 1994; Rossignol et al., 2006; Yakovenko et al., 2005). This characteristic is preserved in the absence of V2a interneurons. Similarly, the alternation of fore and hind legs on the same side is also preserved in the absence of V2a interneurons. Neonatal (P0) Chx10∷DTA mice exhibit spontaneous limb movements. In the isolated neonatal spinal cord, electrical stimulation of the sacral spinal cord (including both afferents and ascending interneurons) reliably initiates fictive locomotion (although with synchronous rather than alternating left-right activity) in neonatal Chx10∷DTA spinal cords, as previously shown for wild type spinal cords (Gordon and Whelan, 2006; Zhong et al., 2007). Thus, locomotion can be initiated in vivo and in vitro in the absence of V2a interneurons.
V2a interneurons control gait at high speedRunning on a treadmill, as the speed increases, Chx10∷DTA mice switch from a trot to a poorly coordinated intermediate state and finally to a gallop, whereas wild type mice show a trotting gait at all speeds. This variability in left-right limb coordination is consistent with the anatomical finding that excitatory V2a interneurons synapse onto commissural neurons, which coordinate activity in the left and right sides of the spinal cord (Crone et al., 2008). The speed dependence of V2a neuron function is consistent with the role of the CiD interneurons which express the Chx10 homolog alx in the zebrafish; a subset of these interneurons is selectively activated only at high swim speeds (Kimura et al., 2006). This speed-dependent role of V2a interneurons in left-right coordination is observed even in the isolated spinal cord. How might V2a interneurons integrate the frequency of locomotor activity and coordination of the left-right CPGs?Figure 8 presents a simple model for the role of the V2a interneurons in speed-dependent regulation of gait. The coordination of left-right motor activity is mediated by CIN systems that are functionally inhibitory or excitatory (Bracci et al., 1996; Butt and Kiehn, 2003; Cazalets et al., 1994; Cohen and Harris-Warrick, 1984; Cowley and Schmidt, 1995; Hagevik and McClellan, 1994; Hinckley et al., 2005; Quinlan and Kiehn, 2007). The relative activity of the functionally excitatory and inhibitory CIN pathways determines whether the hindlimbs alternate to produce trotting or are active synchronously to produce galloping (Harris-Warrick and Cohen, 1984; Kullander et al. 2003). Synchronous, rather than uncoupled, left right leg movements in Chx10∷DTA mice at the highest speeds indicate that the functionally excitatory CIN system is intact in mice lacking V2a neurons, consistent with previous studies showing synchronous left-right activity in the disinhibited neonatal Chx10∷DTA spinal cord (Crone et al., 2008). Our previous study provided anatomical evidence that V2a neurons provide excitatory drive to the functionally inhibitory CIN system including the V0 class of CINs. V0 interneurons are necessary for maintaining left- right alternation in isolated spinal cord preparations (Lanuza et al., 2004). One plausible mechanism underlying the speed dependence of V2a interneuron function is that the V2a-V0 system is the predominant regulator of left right alternation at fast speeds but is either silent or redundant with another unidentified functionally inhibitory CIN pathway at slow speeds (Fig. 8). The ability of Chx10∷DTA mice to alternate left and right legs while running slowly indicates that other CIN systems might be sufficient to maintain alternation at these speeds. The alternative system might also include V0 interneurons, which would then receive excitatory drive from unidentified interneurons other than V2a interneurons. These unidentified interneurons must reside within the spinal cord, because isolated cords from Chx10∷DTA mice exhibit normal left right alternation at slow speed. An alternative possibility is that the commissural excitatory pathway becomes stronger at higher speeds, so that in the absence of the V2a-V0 inhibitory system, the balance of crossed excitation and inhibition is shifted to excitation, resulting in left-right synchrony.It is not yet clear whether the V2a-V0 system is normally inactive at low speeds, or whether it is merely unnecessary due to the presence of an additional alternating system at slow speeds. In zebrafish and Xenopus embryos, the speed of locomotion is correlated with selective activation and inactivation of different subsets of spinal interneurons, thus changing the neuronal composition of the locomotor CPG as a function of cycle frequency (Kimura et al., 2006; McLean et al., 2008; Ritter et al., 2001; Sillar and Roberts, 1993). Our results are consistent with the hypothesis that the CPG neuronal composition changes with speed in mammals as well. Based on the genetic similarities among vertebrates in specifying the principle neural cell types (V0-V3) in the developing ventral spinal cord (Goulding and Pfaff, 2005; Lewis, 2006), and similar properties of En1 neurons (Higashijima et al., 2004) and of Chx10/Alx neurons (Kimura et al., 2006) in mammals and zebrafish, it would not be surprising that similar strategies might be used for their recruitment during locomotor behavior. We propose that in the mouse, the V2a-V0 system is the predominant circuit driving left right alternation at fast speeds, whereas an alternative circuit functions at slow speeds (Fig. 8). As shown in Fig. 8, one way to do this is for the V2a-V0 system to be weak or silent at low speeds, but more active at high speeds, while the alternative functionally inhibitory system is active at low speeds and weak or silent at high speeds. Thus, in the absence of the V2a interneurons in Chx10∷DTA mice, the functionally excitatory crossed pathway will dominate at high speeds, causing synchronous left- right limb coordination and a galloping gait.In conclusion, we find that left-right alternation is progressively lost and eventually replaced by synchronous galloping as Chx10∷DTA mice run faster. This speed-dependent switch in gait is likely due to the loss of spinal V2a interneurons, as it can be recapitulated during fictive locomotion in the isolated Chx10∷DTA spinal cord. These data demonstrate that V2a interneurons in the lower spinal cord are responsible for maintaining left-right alternation, but only at higher speeds of locomotion. Thus, in mice, the requirement for V2a neurons to maintain left-right limb alternation is dependent upon locomotor speed.
Supplementary Material
Supp1Supplementary FigureHind limb alternation in Chx10∷DTA mice varies with the frequency of limb movement. The stride frequency was calculated for one trial per animal (n= 11 wild type and 11 Chx10∷DTA animals) at each treadmill speed from 15 cms to 95 cms, at 10 cms intervals. Trials were grouped into three stride frequency ranges: < 7 steps/s, 7-9 steps/s, and > 9 steps/s in order to compare trials from animals moving their limbs at the same rate. Circular plots demonstrate consistent left-right hind limb phase (direction) and consistency of phase (distance from center) in wild type mice at all speeds. Chx10∷DTA mice exhibit consistent alternation at < 7 steps/s, less consistent alternation at 7-9 steps/s, and either inconsistent alternation or synchronous hind limb movement at > 9 steps/s.
Supp2Supplementary VideosDigital video footage (135 frames/s) was filmed from underneath a clear treadmill belt of mice running at the speeds indicated below. All videos are shown at 1/5th speed.(A) A wild type mouse running at 25 cm/s alternates left and right fore and hind legs.
Supp3(B) A Chx10∷DTA mouse running at 25 cm/s alternates left and right fore and hind legs.
Supp4(C) The same wild type mouse shown in (A) running at 85 cm/s maintains alternation of left and right fore and hind legs.
Supp5(D) The same Chx10∷DTA mouse shown in (B) running at 85 cm/s gallops using synchronous hind leg movements.
