INTRODUCTION
Dietary Restriction (DR), defined as a regime of limited protein intake without malnutrition, leads to increased lifespan and healthspan in all tested model organisms (Fontana and Partridge, 2015; Kapahi et al., 2010). One of the conserved fundamental adaptations to DR, or to other low-nutrient conditions such as fasting, involves a metabolic shift towards increased triglyceride utilization. DR increases the conversion of dietary carbohydrates into lipids, elevates fat storage, and accelerates lipid turnover in flies, which appears to have a profound positive impact on longevity (Katewa et al., 2012; Longo and Mattson, 2014). Increased lipid turnover upon caloric restriction and increased adiposity upon protein restriction (which correlate with increased lifespan) has also been described in mice (Bruss et al., 2010).
Drosophila has emerged as an excellent model organism to explore the mechanisms driving diet and/or age-related changes in lipid metabolism. Importantly, Drosophila provides critical technical advantages that allow characterizing tissue-tissue coordination during metabolic adaptation (Chatterjee et al., 2014; Katewa et al., 2012; Leopold and Perrimon, 2007). While lipids are stored in the fatbody and transferred to oenocytes for mobilization (Chatterjee et al., 2014; Gutierrez et al., 2007), the Drosophila intestine also contributes to lipid synthesis and cholesterol homeostasis (Sieber and Thummel, 2012; Song et al., 2014). The Drosophila intestine plays a key role in modulating healthspan by modulation of immune responses, metabolic homeostasis and stress signaling (Biteau et al., 2011; Wang et al., 2014a).
The adult intestine is regenerated by intestinal stem cells (ISCs), which divide to replace functional enterocytes (ECs) and enteroendocrine cells when needed (Biteau et al., 2011). The intestine is also central to longevity in Drosophila, as gut function rapidly declines in aging flies (Biteau et al., 2011; Guo et al., 2014). Furthermore, in old flies, the ability of the intestine to generate and store lipids is severely compromised (Karpac et al., 2013), and restoring the adequate metabolic function of this tissue increases healthspan (Biteau et al., 2010; Karpac et al., 2013). The age-related decline in intestinal function in flies is a consequence of complex inflammatory conditions that are associated with increased protein misfolding (Wang et al., 2014b, 2015). How ER stress and ER stress response pathways influence diet and/or age-related metabolic function of the intestinal epithelium remains unclear.
The ER stress transducer IRE1 triggers one of the three signaling pathways engaged by ER stress. Interestingly, IRE1 also influences lipid homeostasis (Nikawa and Yamashita, 1992; Volmer and Ron, 2015). IRE1 is also required for S6K and HIF-1 mediated lifespan extension under DR in C elegans, though the mechanisms mediating this effect remain unclear (Chen et al., 2009). During ER stress, IRE1 dimerizes and splices the mRNA of XBP1, leading to translation of a functional transcription factor that induces genes involved in ER biogenesis, protein folding and degradation, to restore ER homeostasis (Ron and Walter, 2007). IRE1 splices and degrades several other mRNAs in a process dubbed RIDD (Regulated IRE1-Dependent Decay), alleviating the protein load into the ER (Hollien and Weissman, 2006). IRE1alpha further regulates a shift to a ketogenic metabolism under starvation conditions in the mouse liver (Shao et al., 2014), and mice deficient for XBP1 develop insulin resistance and are prone to diabetes (Ozcan et al., 2004). To regulate lipogenesis, XBP1 controls target genes that are functionally distinct from its canonical ER stress-related targets, and are regulated by distinct sequence motifs (Acosta-Alvear et al., 2007; Sha et al., 2009).
The role of IRE1/XBP1 in the regulation of lipid homeostasis has not been explored in the context of a DR intervention or during conditions of obligatory lipid recruitment, such as prolonged fasting/starvation. Here we identify IRE1 as a player in DR-induced lifespan extension in flies. Our data suggest that IRE1 is required for the metabolic shift towards elevated triglyceride turnover occurring during DR, and that absence of IRE1 is detrimental under this dietary intervention. Moreover, we identify the transcription factor Sugarbabe as a downstream target of the IRE1/XBP1 module that is required for increased lipid turnover under DR. Our results provide insights into physiological mechanisms that link tissue-specific metabolic adaptation to lifespan extension under DR conditions.
RESULTS
IRE1 is required for DR-mediated increases in lifespan, starvation resistance and triglyceride synthesisThe increase in fat stores and triglyceride turnover during DR results in increased starvation tolerance in flies. Whole body depletion of IRE1 via ubiquitous RNAi knockdown (using the RU486-inducible gene-switch GAL4 drivers daughterless-gs (da-gs) or tubulin-gs (tub-gs)), led to a striking decrease in the starvation resistance of flies previously fed on DR food for 10days (Fig S1A and S1B). We assessed the tissue-specificity of this effect by inhibiting IRE1 specifically in the brain (ElavGS-GAL4), the muscle (MHC-GAL4), oenocytes (pE(800)GS-GAL4) and differentiated cells of the gut (5966GS-GAL4) (Fig S1C-E). These experiments revealed that IRE1 expression in ECs (5966GS-GAL4) in the midgut is required for starvation tolerance (Fig 1A and Fig S1F). We confirmed efficient IRE1 down-regulation in dissected guts by qPCR using two EC drivers 5966GS-GAL4 and NP1-GAL4 (Fig S1G, H). To determine if IRE1 depletion in ECs affects overall gut integrity, we monitored intestinal stem cell (ISC) activity, which increases with age and in response to gut damage, as well as overall EC morphology. IRE1-deficiency in ECs did not result in significant changes in mitotic activity in the gut, and staining against the beta-catenin homolog Armadillo (which outlines cell boundaries in the intestinal epithelium) did not reveal any morphological changes (Fig S1I and S1J).It has been reported that depleting IRE1alpha in mouse intestinal cells induces high levels of apoptosis leading to colitis (Zhang et al., 2015). To examine apoptotic cells, we employed the APOLINER apoptosis-reporter (Fig S1K) and measured transcript levels of Reaper and Grim. We observed no significant increase in apoptosis in the midguts of flies as old as 22 days after IRE1 depletion (Fig S1L and S1M). Since 5966GS-GAL4>IRE1RNAi flies on DR do not show evident accumulation of damage in the intestine of young animals, we reasoned that another mechanism must be mediating the decrease in starvation resistance.Flies under DR undergo a metabolic shift from a glycolytic system towards fatty acid oxidation, using triglycerides as a primary source of energy. Although the carbohydrate amount in the experimental food is the same in both diets (5% sucrose and 8% cornmeal), the lower protein content in our model of DR (0.5% DR vs 5% AL) leads to enhanced triglyceride synthesis (Katewa et al., 2012). Lipid homeostasis and synthesis are known to decrease with age in the midgut (Karpac et al., 2013). Under DR, this loss in lipid levels in ECs with age is delayed, when compared to AL (Fig S2A and S2A’). Depletion of IRE1 in the ECs resulted in a dramatic decrease in lipid levels under DR in the anterior midgut (knockdown via 5966GS-GAL4 in Fig 1B and 1B’, or via NP1-GAL4 in Fig S2B and S2B’). We confirmed that RU486 (100 μM), used to induce the geneswitch system does not affect lipid levels in the intestine (Fig S2C and S2C’) nor lifespan (Fig S2D) on either diet. We also observed a 50% decrease in overall triglyceride (TG) levels, as measured in whole-fly TG content (Fig 1C), or by sudan black (ideal to stain abdominal fat, Fig S1E). While we measured this lower amount of fat stores on flies fed on both diets, the decrease is more dramatic on DR (Fig 1B, interaction p-value = 0.0002 and Fig 1C, interaction p-value = 0.0141; determined by two-way-ANOVA). These diminished fat stores are consistent with the lower starvation resistance upon IRE1 depletion.The lower fat content in flies in which IRE1 is knocked down in ECs could be a consequence of decreased TG synthesis or increased consumption. To assess these possibilities we examined the dynamic changes in TGs after feeding radiolabeled glucose for a 36h period as described previously (Katewa et al., 2012). As expected, control flies on DR accumulate higher levels of TG compared to flies on AL food (Katewa et al., 2012). Upon loss of IRE1, however, much lower incorporation rates are observed on both diets (Fig 1D), suggesting a defect in de novo lipid synthesis. To further characterize the role of IRE1 in lipid synthesis and its requirement for survival we assessed the ability of flies to regain starvation tolerance upon short-term sugar-only feeding. We reasoned that feeding only sugar after a starvation period would allow flies to replenish their lipid stores via de novo conversion of dietary carbohydrates to fatty acids and enhance starvation resistance. We first tested directly the capacity to convert dietary sucrose into lipids by feeding control flies (−RU486) or 5966GS-GAL4>IRE1RNAi flies (+RU496) a sucrose-only diet for 36h, after being previously reared on either AL or DR (Fig 1E and E’). Upon sucrose-only feeding we noticed that overall lipid levels were decreased when compared to their fully fed controls on both diets, suggesting that a minimum protein content is required for normal metabolic function and lipid accumulation (compare “control” with “5% sucrose” for -RU486 on both diets). In line with the lower conversion of glucose to fat (Fig 1D) we observed that depletion of IRE1 led to lower lipid content in the intestine on both diets. We then tested whether this lack of conversion of sucrose into lipids correlates with a lower resistance to food deprivation. Indeed, after control flies, already under starvation for 10h and 30h, are placed for a short period (8-10h) on sucrose-only agar food (represented by vertical green dashed lines on Fig S1F) they can increase their starvation resistance and survive longer than their constantly starved siblings (solid green line versus solid red line). However, flies in which IRE1 had been depleted in ECs did not exhibit this increase (dotted red and green curves), suggesting that absence of IRE1 impairs the capacity to enhance starvation resistance upon refeeding dietary carbohydrates.We conclude that IRE1 expression in the intestinal epithelium is required for lipid synthesis, a function that is essential for survival upon DR. Consequently, upon depleting IRE1 in the midgut, overall longevity was drastically reduced specifically upon DR (Fig1F red curves, S2G and S2H). When fed a rich diet (AL), IRE1 depletion in the midgut did not significantly influence lifespan (Fig 1F blue curves, S2G and S2H; Cox proportional hazards interaction p-value <2×10−10 for both repeats). These results indicate that IRE1 has an unexpected role in DR-induced longevity, promoting metabolic adaptation to nutrient restricted conditions in the midgut.
XBP1 acts downstream of IRE1 to regulate lipid levels under DRConsistent with a role of XBP1 as a downstream target of IRE1, we found that depletion of XBP1 using 5966GS-GAL4 (Fig S3A) reduces the lipid accumulation in the anterior midgut normally observed upon DR (Fig 2A and 2A’). Similar to loss of IRE1, this decrease in lipid content is associated with a lower capacity of survival upon nutrient depletion (Fig 2B and S3B). To confirm that IRE1 acts via XBP1 to regulate lipid levels under DR, we tested whether expression of a spliced form of XBP1 mRNA (UAS-XBP1s construct) in ECs is sufficient to rescue the IRE1RNAi phenotypes. Adding a second UAS-regulated transcript to recombinant flies (5966GS-GAL4; IRE1RNAi) did not affect the IRE1 knockdown-induced lower lipid stores (Fig S3C). While on its own, XBP1s did not further increase starvation resistance of animals fed on DR nor AL (Fig S3D) and did not generally increase intestinal lipid accumulation on either diet (Fig S3E and S3E’), both local lipid accumulation in the anterior midgut and starvation resistance were recovered in animals co-expressing IRE1RNAi and XBP1s (Fig 2C-D).To characterize the role of canonical ER stress signaling in the DR-induced metabolic switch, we determined if flies under DR have altered levels of ER stress. We used an XBP1 reporter line (Ryoo et al., 2013) to assess tissue-specific activation of the ER stress response mediated by IRE1. Surprisingly, the XBP1-DsRed signal was much higher in the guts of flies fed on AL and this activation was dependent on IRE1 (Fig S3F and S3G). This result contrasts with the fact that both IRE1 and XBP1 are required for metabolic adaptation to DR, and may be explained by different constitutive and inducible roles of the ER stress pathway, where genetic programs downstream of XBP1 are selectively engaged dependent on whether acute ER stress is activating IRE1/XBP1 signaling, or whether changes in nutrient conditions induce chronic metabolic adaptation. Such selective programs engaged by IRE1 signaling have been proposed in other contexts as well (Shen et al., 2005; Volmer and Ron, 2015; Volmer et al., 2013). Supporting a complex role for IRE1/XBP1 signaling in intestinal homeostasis, overexpression of either IRE1 or spliced XBP1 in ECs is not sufficient to increase lifespan, but slightly reduces lifespan (Fig S3H and S3I). Overexpression of IRE1 was also not sufficient to prevent the age-dependent loss of homeostasis that results in increased ISC activation (Fig S3J).
The dietary-sensor Sugarbabe is required for DR and mediates IRE1-regulated lipid homeostasisTo further dissect the mechanism by which the IRE1/XBP1 module regulates dietary carbohydrate-derived lipid synthesis, we analyzed the total transcriptome of Drosophila midgut ECs during DR using ribosome tagging and RNAseq. Flag-tagged RPL13A was used to pull down ribosomes expressed exclusively in midgut ECs, via the NP1-GAL4 driver, and used to isolate mRNAs directly bound to polysomes (Thomas et al., 2012). Using this approach, we profiled changes induced in EC gene expression after a 10 day DR intervention (Sup Table S1). A large number of up-regulated genes relate to digestive activity, including peptidases and proteases, as well as amino acid sensing and transport (Fig 3A and Sup Table S2). DR also induced a large array of G-protein coupled receptors, as well as genes encoding proteins acting in ion transport and the mitochondrial electron transport chain (ETC) (Fig 3A).Interestingly, there is a strong suppression of glutathione oxidative response genes, such as GstD9, GstD6, GstD5 (Fig 3A and Sup Table S2). Gene ontology analysis further shows downregulation of genes related to processes that are repressed under DR (Fig 3B and Sup Table S2). We also observe that a large set of genes related to lipid regulation is altered. The “lipid metabolic processes” category is comprised of 31 target genes (Sup Table S3) and further GO analysis of this subset list - comprising triacylglycerol lipases (Yp2, Yp3), alpha and beta-hydrolases (Lip3, CG10383, CG8093) and phospholipases (swiss cheese, CG17191, CG15533) - reveals that they are related mostly to lipid breakdown and catabolic processes (Fig 3C). This suggests that in the midgut, DR inhibits lipid breakdown. It has previously been suggested that such a repression is an initial step before conversion of dietary sugars into lipids (Zinke et al., 2002). Thus, we further compared changes induced by DR with the ones observed in response to high sugar-feeding from two studies (Zinke et al. 2002 and Matilla et al. 2015). We observe a partial overlap in repressed genes (of 15.5% with the first and 11.6% with the second). Commonly down regulated targets related to lipid catabolism include the lipases Lip3, bmm, CG6277, CG6283 and CG8093, among others, which should result in halting lipid breakdown, shifting the balance to their synthesis and accumulation, for subsequent transport to other tissues (Sup Table S4). We confirmed the regulation of some of these genes in independent samples via qPCR and found that the DR-mediated repression of these lipases is dependent on IRE1 (Fig S4A-D).Under DR conditions, we also observe up-regulation of genes involved in lipid synthesis, like FASN2, Akhr, and, importantly, a strong IRE1-dependent up-regulation of sugarbabe, a homologue of mammalian C2H2 Gli-like zinc finger transcription factors (Fig. 3D), and likely a requirement for XBP1 in this induction (Fig. 3E). sugarbabe is induced in the midgut, fat body and Malphigian tubules upon sugar feeding, and coordinates the repression of a network of lipases and induction of key drivers of lipogenesis (such as ACC and FAS), setting the stage for lipid accumulation (Mattila et al., 2015; Zinke et al., 2002). Its expression is strongly repressed in melt mutants, which have almost 50% less fat stores than normal (Teleman et al., 2005). Overexpression of spliced XBP1 (UAS-XBP1s) further increased the induction of sugarbabe under DR, but did not affect its expression under AL (Fig 3F), suggesting that XBP1 interacts with other factors only present under DR or a “sugar response” condition, to induce sugarbabe expression. In accordance with these data, in situ hybridization shows that in response to DR or XBP1s over-expression, sugarbabe levels are specifically induced in the anterior midgut region, where lipid accumulation is also observed (Fig 3G).Depletion of sugarbabe in ECs resulted in lower starvation resistance (Fig 4A) and reduced lipid levels in anterior midgut ECs (Fig 4B and 4B’). To test whether Sugarbabe acts by repressing lipid breakdown, and thus facilitating the metabolic shift towards lipid usage under DR downstream of IRE1, we examined if restoring sugarbabe expression levels (using 5966GS-GAL4 and UAS-sug) would be sufficient to rescue IRE1/XBP1 loss of function phenotypes in midgut ECs. In wild-type backgrounds, this perturbation did not alter the starvation resistance of flies raised either on AL or DR nor their lifespan (Fig 4C and S4E). However, induction of sugarbabe in 5966GS-GAL4>IRE1RNAi animals was sufficient to rescue the increased starvation sensitivity, placing sugarbabe downstream of IRE1 in the metabolic shift towards lipid usage under DR (Fig 4D). Supporting this interpretation, sugarbabe over-expression also rescued the shorter lifespan of IRE1-depleted flies on DR (Fig 4E and 4E’).
DISCUSSION
Our results identify an IRE1/XBP1/Sugarbabe signaling module that is required to establish a permissive environment for de novo lipogenesis and lipid accumulation under DR (Fig 4F). While our data indicate transcriptional regulation of lipases as a mechanism by which IRE1/XBP1/Sug influences lipid synthesis, it remains possible that this module also influences the absorptive capacity of ECs during digestion. RNA-Seq data indicate strong induction of genes involved in nutrient transport upon DR, yet additional studies are needed to test this possibility. Also, the less dramatic effect of sugarbabe knockdown on starvation resistance might be a reflection of being just one of several downstream mechanisms by which IRE1/XBP1 influence metabolic adaptation. Several studies have linked IRE1 and XBP1, proteins predominantly associated with the ER stress pathway, with increased lipogenesis and lipid usage (Acosta-Alvear et al., 2007; Lee et al., 2008; Shao et al., 2014). Our study highlights sugarbabe as a downstream mediator of this response in the Drosophila intestine. We propose that under the low protein and high sugar diet conditions of DR, IRE1/XBP1 signaling in ECs is required for the induction of a lipid anabolic response that establishes a beneficial metabolic state of the animal and extends lifespan. As part of this function, XBP1 may also contribute to the previously described rapid induction of sugarbabe by dietary sugars (Mattila et al., 2015; Zinke et al., 2002). In addition to the regulation of XBP1 and Sugarbabe, IRE1 may also influence lipogenesis by regulating the transcripts of several lipid metabolism genes via a mechanism called RIDD (Regulated IRE1-Dependent Decay) (Coelho et al., 2013; Hollien and Weissman, 2006). However, a role for RIDD in mediating a metabolic shift under DR remains to be explored.
ER stress has been extensively linked to lipid homeostasis as well as diabetes and metabolic syndrome (Ozcan et al., 2004; Wang and Kaufman, 2012). Interestingly, we find that XBP1 levels are not increased, but in fact downregulated in DR when compared to AL. This observation contrasts with the DR-specific requirement for IRE1 for survival, and may be explained by the fact that under AL, the high dietary protein drives increased protein production (increasing ER stress) when compared to DR (Tatar et al., 2014). We speculate distinct roles for IRE1 under the two dietary conditions akin to the proposed ‘constitutive’ and ‘induced’ roles of ER stress response pathways (Shen et al., 2005). We speculate that loss of IRE1 under AL condition is not sufficient to disrupt the UPR in ECs and lead to premature death, likely as other UPR effectors cope with increased protein folding requirement in the ER. However, it is enough to lower lipid production and storage, critical for survival under DR. We propose that this specific requirement is a direct consequence of a UPR-independent function of IRE1/XBP1 signaling in lipogenesis. A UPR-independent function for both IRE1 and XBP1 has previously been proposed in the context of development (Shen et al., 2005). The activation of IRE1/XBP1 in the absence of acute ER stress is likely mediated by changes in cellular lipid content, known to allow IRE1 dimerization independently of the UPR (Volmer and Ron, 2015; Volmer et al., 2013).
A recent study of the role of IRE1alpha in the intestine of mice showed that depletion of IRE1 in EC generated mice with impaired intestinal epithelial barrier function and that were short lived (Zhang et al., 2015). While the authors explain their colitis-like phenotype with increased apoptosis in the gut, it will be interesting to test whether a loss of lipid homeostasis contributes to these phenotypes. Since DR-fed flies depleted of IRE1 die at a very young age, we cannot exclude that IRE1 deficiency causes gut damage later in life, with subsequent ISC activation and dysplasia. Our data suggest that such deleterious effects of IRE1 deficiency on epithelial homeostasis are preceded by changes in the homeostatic metabolism of ECs.
Based on the evolutionary conservation of intestinal morphology and function, as well as of the signaling molecules involved, it can be anticipated that the IRE1/XBP1/Sugarbabe-mediated metabolic adaptation of the intestinal epithelium is conserved in vertebrates and may be part of the metabolic adaptation required for DR-induced lifespan extension.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
Fly husbandry and stocksFly strains and fly media recipes are in Sup Materials. Dietary Restriction (DR) and Ad Libitum (AL) differ by their concentration of yeast of 0.5% and 5%, respectively. To induce gene switch drivers, 100uM RU486 was diluted in the (+) food and the same amount of ethanol in the (−) control. All fly lines used in this study have been backcrossed at least 6 generations to our lab w1118 stock.Survival AnalysisAll longevity survival assays were carried out on AL or DR media as described previously (Katewa et al., 2012). Details in Sup Materials.Starvation AssaysFlies were maintained as for a longevity survival assay. After 10-12 days feeding on either DR or AL food, they were transferred to vials containing 1% agar and flipped into fresh agar-only every 24 hrs. 25 mated females were used per vial, from 3-6 independent mating bottles per condition.
Lipid analysisTriglyceride and free fatty acid content (TG) were measured via a Stanbio labs kit (Boerne, TX) and normalized to total protein. 12 replicates of 4-5 flies each, from 3 independent matting bottles per condition were used. Heads were removed to avoid interference of the red eye pigment with the signal produced.Oil Red O (ORO) staining: guts were dissected in PBS, fixed in 4% PFA/PBS for 20 min and incubated in fresh Oil Red O for 30 min. ORO signal was quantified in the anterior half of the midguts using ImageJ.Lipid synthesis assay: After 14 days feeding on regular AL and DR media, 150 flies were transferred to AL or DR media with 14C labeled glucose for 36 hrs. The de novo synthesis of lipids is expressed as the amount of 14C radioactivity incorporated in lipids extracted from 1 mg of fly wt. (details in Sup Materials).
In situ HybridizationProtocol was adapted from (Zinke et al., 2002) using Digoxigenin (DIG) labeled RNA probes detected by NBT/BCIP assay (DIG nucleic acid detection kit, Roche). Primers used to generate RNA probes for sugarbabe: 5´-ccc acc aca gac aac aaa c-3´ and 5´-gtt cag att cga tgg atg c-3´Statistical AnalysisSurvival assays were analyzed with GraphPad Prism (v.5.0). Significance of the interaction between two variables in survival outcomes was tested by Cox Proportional Hazards. Interaction between genetic manipulations with different diets was evaluated by two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Bonferroni’s post hoc test. Other data were analyzed by the student’s Ttest (analysis in Sup Materials). p-values shown: *<0.05, **<0.01 and ***<0.001.
Supplementary Material
1
2
3
4
5
6
