Introduction
Gene expression programs that determine cell identity are regulated by interactions between DNA, RNA and protein, and these programs change during differentiation as new interactions are created and previous interactions fall apart. Long noncoding RNAs are components of the circuitry that control embryonic stem cell (ESC) pluripotency and differentiation1–6, and the lncRNA DIGIT regulates definitive endoderm differentiation4.
We find that DIGIT interacts with BRD3, a member of the bromodomain and extra-terminal (BET) domain family of proteins. BET proteins contain two bromodomains, which bind acetylated histones7,8, and an extra-terminal domain that enables interaction with other proteins, including transcription factors and co-activators9–12. BRD2, BRD3 and BRD4 are BET family proteins that are ubiquitously expressed and have unique functions in development. Brd4−/− embryos die before implantation13, and Brd2−/− embryos die between E9.5 and E11.514. BRD4 regulates pluripotency and self-renewal of murine ESCs15, while BRD2 promotes expression of Nodal when ESCs are released from pluripotency16. Different functions of BET proteins in ESCs are associated with different patterns of genome occupancy, where BRD4 is enriched at enhancers, while BRD2 and BRD3 are enriched at promoters15. Furthermore, BRD4 forms phase-separated droplets in murine ESCs, which have been proposed to promote the recruitment of transcription machinery17. While critical roles for BRD2 and BRD4 have been established in early development, the function of BRD3 is unclear.
Here we report that DIGIT interacts with BRD3 and promotes the formation of phase-separated condensates during endoderm differentiation. With differentiation, BRD3 occupies new sites at endoderm genes, many of which are also regulated by DIGIT. Recombinant BRD3 binds H3K18ac, and BRD3 co-occupies the genome with H3K18ac. DIGIT is enriched at sites of H3K18ac, and depletion of DIGIT reduces BRD3 occupancy at these sites. We propose that BRD3 is recruited to sites of H3K18ac to form phase-separated condensates and promote transcription, and BRD3 recruitment and condensate formation is dependent on DIGIT. Through this process, the interaction between DIGIT and BRD3 at sites of H3K18ac activates genes that regulate endoderm differentiation.
Results
Design of an aptamer-based approach to define the DIGIT-protein interactomeWe fused the 3’ end of DIGIT cDNA to four copies of an aptamer with high affinity for streptavidin (4xS1m)18,19. We confirmed that the DIGIT-4xS1m transcript was retained in the nucleus after transient transfection (Figure 1A), as previously described for endogenous DIGIT4, and precipitated DIGIT-4xS1m with streptavidin beads in UV cross-linked cells (Figure 1B). We then adjusted the potassium chloride concentration in the wash buffer to optimize enrichment of DIGIT over GAPDH mRNA (Extended Data Figure 1A), resulting in greater than 125-fold enrichment of DIGIT-4xS1m after precipitation (Figure 1C). These experiments show that the 4xS1m aptamer can be fused to lncRNAs and used to enrich lncRNAs in UV cross-linked cells.
DIGIT interacts with BRD3To identify proteins that interact with DIGIT, we transiently expressed DIGIT-4xS1m in hESCs and differentiated toward endoderm. As controls, we ectopically expressed a scrambled form of DIGIT fused to 4xS1m (SCRM-4xS1m) (Extended Data Figure 1B) and the DIGIT transcript without 4xS1m. We performed UV cross-linking followed by streptavidin precipitation and mass spectrometry (MS). BRD3 showed the highest interaction score (Figure 1D and Table S1), and the interaction was confirmed by streptavidin precipitation followed by immunoblotting to detect BRD3 protein (Figure 1E).It is possible that an increase in the number of DIGIT molecules present with ectopic expression could lead to interactions that are not formed with endogenous DIGIT. To validate the interaction of BRD3 with endogenous DIGIT, we performed RNA-immunoprecipitation (RIP) in nuclear lysates from endoderm cells (Extended Data Figure 1C and 1D) using an antibody against BRD3, which demonstrated a 6-fold increase in DIGIT compared to RNA precipitated with IgG (Figure 1F). Enrichment of DIGIT was also greater than enrichment measured for eleven other RNA transcripts. For this analysis, we included the lncRNAs DEANR1 and GATA6-AS20. GATA6-AS has not been evaluated in endoderm differentiation. Therefore, we defined the 5′- and 3′-ends of GATA6-AS by Rapid Amplification of cDNA Ends (RACE), cloned the full-length cDNA from endoderm cells (Extended Data Figure 1E) and quantified expression with differentiation (Extended Data Figure 1F) to define the GATA6-AS transcript that is induced upon endoderm differentiation. These experiments confirm that endogenous BRD3 interacts with endogenous DIGIT and reveals that BRD3 preferentially binds DIGIT compared to selected RNA transcripts.SMARCD1, a component of the SWI/SNF chromatin remodeling complex21, which is involved in embryonic stem cell differentiation22, was also identified to interact with DIGIT (Figure 1D). Endogenous DIGIT associates with SMARCD1 (Extended Data Figure 2A), and SMARCD1 interacts with BRD3 (Extended Data Figure 2B). Future studies are needed to determine if DIGIT, BRD3 and SMARCD1 are present in the same complex.To understand how BRD3 interacts with the entire transcriptome, we performed RIP using an antibody against BRD3 followed by sequencing of precipitated RNA. DIGIT was enriched with precipitation of BRD3, whether compared to total nuclear RNA (input) or to RIPs using IgG as a control (Figure 1G). Furthermore, we found that DIGIT was one of the most enriched transcripts with BRD3 RIP (Figure 1H, Extended Data Figure 2C, left and Extended Data Figure 2D, left, Table S1). These results provide further evidence that BRD3 binds DIGIT and reveal that BRD3 also interacts with other coding and noncoding RNAs in both endoderm and hESCs (Extended Data Figure 2C and 2D, Table S1).
BRD3 shows specificity for DIGIT compared to BRD2 and BRD4BRD2, BRD3 and BRD4 but not BRDT are expressed in endoderm cells (Extended Data Figure 2E), and we asked if the other BET proteins interact with DIGIT. We again observed an enrichment of DIGIT with precipitation of BRD3. However, recovery of DIGIT was reduced with precipitation of BRD2 or BRD4 (Figure 1I and Extended Data Figure 2F), suggesting that BRD3 may preferentially interact with DIGIT compared to either BRD2 or BRD4.
DIGIT interacts with BRD3 in gel shift assaysTo further evaluate the interaction between DIGIT and BRD3, we performed gel electrophoresis mobility shift assays (EMSA) with recombinant BRD3 fused to monomeric (m) EGFP and either DIGIT or SCRM. BRD3 and DIGIT formed multiple distinct shifted bands (Figure 2A, red arrows, Extended Data Figure 3A and 3B), consistent with a multivalent mode of interaction23, and these distinct shifted bands were weaker with BRD3 and SCRM. The dissociation constant (Kd) was lower for BRD3-DIGIT than BRD3-SCRM (Kd = 26.4 nM versus Kd = 46.3 nM) (Figure 2B), and quantification of the shift for DIGIT and SCRM at the BRD3 concentrations flanking the Kd values also demonstrates a stronger shift for DIGIT (Figure 2C). We found similar results in a repeat experiment (Extended Data Figure 3C and 3D). With increasing amounts of RNA, BRD3 showed accelerated migration whether the RNA was DIGIT or SCRM (Figure 2D, left). However, the relative amount of labeled RNA that migrates with BRD3 is higher for DIGIT than SCRM at each concentration (Figure 2D, right and 2E). These results suggest that DIGIT interacts with BRD3 with higher affinity and partitions more stably within the RNA-protein complex than a scrambled RNA of the same length and nucleotide composition.
DIGIT interacts with BRD3 bromodomainsWe evaluated the ability of the bromodomains (BD1 and BD2) and extra-terminal (ET) domain of BRD3 to interact with RNA and with DIGIT. We first performed Orthogonal Organic Phase Separation (OOPS)24 and determined that full-length BRD3, BD1, BD1/BD2 and the ET domain, but not mEGFP, interact with RNAs (Figure 2F and 2G, Extended Data Figure 3E and 3F). In contrast, only BD1 and BD1/BD2 interact with DIGIT (Figure 2H). Thus while both bromodomains and ET domains can interact with RNA, only the bromodomains of BRD3 interact with DIGIT.
DIGIT localizes within BRD3 punctaWe next visualized DIGIT and BRD3 within the nuclei of endoderm cells. Images revealed that BRD3 is not evenly distributed through the nucleus, and instead forms puncta (Figure 3A, center), a phenomenon that has been described for BRD417. The analysis also revealed multiple sites of overlap between BRD3 and DIGIT (Figure 3A, left), suggesting that DIGIT transcripts localize to these puncta and we are not simply observing sites of DIGIT transcription inside the puncta.Eighteen percent of DIGIT transcripts overlap with BRD3, and this overlap is significantly higher than the overlap observed between BRD3 and GSC mRNA (<1%) (Figure 3B). For this analysis, we focused only on transcripts localized to the nucleus for both DIGIT (379) and GSC mRNA (2412). DIGIT transcripts are more likely to localize to larger BRD3 puncta compared to GSC (Figure 3C). We previously observed that DIGIT was preferentially enriched with precipitation of BRD3 compared to BRD2 and BRD4 (Figure 1I). To exclude the possibility that the affinity or epitope for an individual antibody may have affected interpretation of these results, we quantified the overlap between puncta for each BET protein and DIGIT in endoderm cells (Figure 3B). We observed that a lower percentage of DIGIT molecules overlap with BRD2 (4.4%) and BRD4 (3.5%), compared to BRD3 (18%). These results suggest that DIGIT preferentially interacts with BRD3 puncta.
BRD3 shows properties of liquid-liquid phase-separated condensatesSeventy-five percent of the long isoform of BRD3 and 67% of the short isoform of BRD3 are disordered (Extended Data Figure 4A), and intrinsically disordered regions have been linked to the formation of phase-separated condensates25–27. To investigate whether BRD3 puncta are phase-separated condensates, we first asked if BRD3 forms condensates in live cells. We used the CRISPR/Cas system to insert mEGFP cDNA into the 5′ end of the endogenous BRD3 gene (Extended Data Figure 4B and 4C). The generation of fused mEGFP-BRD3 was confirmed by immunoblot (Extended Data Figure 4D), and confocal microscopy demonstrated the formation of BRD3 puncta in both live and fixed endoderm cells (Figure 3D). Expression of mEGFP alone did not lead to puncta formation. To test whether BRD3 puncta display rapid exchange kinetics with their surroundings, which is characteristic of phase separated condensates17,28,29, we performed Fluorescence Recovery After Photobleaching (FRAP). BRD3-mEGFP puncta are able to recover up to 20% fluorescence in 10 seconds and up to 38% fluorescence in 30 seconds (Figure 3E and 3F). These results show that BRD3 molecules form puncta with properties consistent with liquid-liquid phase-separated condensates.BRD3 forms phase-separated condensates in hESCs and with endoderm differentiation (Figure 3D–3F, and Extended Data Figure 4E). BRD4 forms condensates in mESCs17, and BRD2, BRD3 and BRD4 all have large domains of predicted disorder (Extended Data Figure 4A). All three proteins form puncta with endoderm differentiation, and BRD3 puncta are separate from those composed of BRD4 or BRD2 (Figure 3G). These findings demonstrate that each BET protein forms nuclear condensates in definitive endoderm, and the condensates formed by BRD3 are distinct from those formed by BRD2 and BRD4.
BRD3 forms condensates in vitroProteins that compose phase-separated biomolecular condensates may form liquid droplets in vitro30. A titration of recombinant BRD3 fused to mEGFP begins to form droplets at a concentration between 1 and 5 μM (Figure 4A). Phase-separated droplets, which rely on electrostatic interactions, are sensitive to salt, so we asked if BRD3 forms droplets at physiologic salt concentrations. A titration of sodium chloride (NaCl) showed that BRD3 forms droplets at concentrations as high as 300 mM (Figure 4B). To confirm that in vitro formation of BRD3 droplets is not uniquely observed in the presence of the macromolecular crowding agent polyethylene glycol (10% PEG-8000), we tested the formation of droplets in the presence of three other crowding agents: PEG-6000 (10%), Ficoll 400 (10%) and bovine serum albumin (BSA, 15%) (Extended Data Figure 4F).
DIGIT nucleates BRD3 condensatesWe next asked if BRD3 droplets formed in vitro interact with DIGIT. We synthesized Cy3-labeled DIGIT (Extended Data Figure 4G) and induced in vitro formation of BRD3 droplets in the presence of Cy3-DIGIT. We observed that the Cy3-DIGIT molecules were concentrated within BRD3 droplets (Figure 4C), while Cy3-DIGIT molecules alone remain dispersed (Figure 4C, far right), suggesting that BRD3 forms phase-separated condensates that contain DIGIT in vitro.Titration of BRD3 in a low concentration of crowding agent (1.5% PEG-6000) and in the presence of in vitro transcribed DIGIT showed the formation of BRD3 droplets at 0.5 μM (Figure 4D), a concentration at which BRD3 droplets do not form on their own (Figure 4A). The equivalent intensity of droplet formation was not observed under these conditions until a BRD3 concentration of greater than 1 μM in the presence of SCRM or in the absence of RNA (Figure 4D). Tracking droplet formation and RNA localization for DIGIT and SCRM demonstrated that DIGIT promotes droplet formation and is concentrated within these droplets (Figure 4E). These findings demonstrate a sequence-specific role for DIGIT in promoting the formation of BRD3 condensates in vitro.To determine if the local concentration of DIGIT within cells promotes the formation of BRD3 condensates, we generated hESCs that stably express either DIGIT or GFP at multiple sites using the Sleeping Beauty system31. We chose GFP RNA as a negative control because this transcript is also not expressed in hESCs. Sequential RNA-FISH and IF revealed BRD3 condensates in regions of increased concentration of DIGIT but not in regions of increased concentration of GFP mRNA (Figure 4F). These results suggest DIGIT promotes the formation of BRD3 condensates both in vitro and in cells.
BRD3 regulates definitive endoderm differentiationBRD3 is dispensable for the maintenance of ESC pluripotency15, but its role in endoderm differentiation is unknown. We generated homozygous hESC lines deficient in BRD3 (BRD3−/−) (Figure 5A and Extended Data Figure 5A) by inserting a puromycin (puro) resistance cassette followed by a stop codon after the sixth amino acid of BRD3. mRNA levels of OCT4 and NANOG show no statistically significant changes between BRD3−/− hESCs and control cells (Figure 5B), suggesting that pluripotency is not significantly affected by the loss of BRD3. However, BRD3−/− hESCs demonstrate a defect in endoderm differentiation as quantified by expression of SOX17 and CXCR4 mRNA (Figure 5C) and co-expression of CXCR4 and c-KIT (Figure 5D).We next evaluated the requirement of BRD3 under differentiation conditions that produce ectoderm, mesoderm, and endoderm32,33. Treatment of hESCs on micropatterned slides with BMP4 induces spatially organized differentiation, with ectoderm (SOX2) in the central region, definitive endoderm (SOX17) on the periphery, and mesoderm between ectoderm and endoderm. BRD3−/− cells showed reduced SOX17 expression on the periphery of differentiating colonies as well as an expansion of SOX2-positive cells in the center (Figure 5E), demonstrating that loss of BRD3 inhibits endoderm differentiation, a phenotype also observed with depletion of DIGIT4.BRD3 encodes both short and long isoforms. Loss of function analysis and studies of the tagged endogenous BRD3 protein were designed to deplete (Figure 5A) and tag both isoforms (Extended Data Figure 4B), and thus do not distinguish between isoforms. Using primers specific for each isoform, we found that only the long isoform is detected with endoderm differentiation (Extended Data Figure 5B). However, ectopic expression of the long and short isoforms are each capable of rescuing expression of genes that mark endoderm cell fate (Extended Data Figure 5C), suggesting overlapping function between the two isoforms even though the long isoform is the predominant form in endoderm.
BRD3 interacts with acetylated H3K18Individual bromodomains of BRD3 interact with acetylated histones8, but the affinity of full-length BRD3 for modified histones has not been investigated. We found that both long and short isoforms of BRD3 show the strongest interaction with H3K18ac (Figure 6A, 6B, Extended Data Figure 6A, and 6B) (Table S2). The long isoform of BRD3 also shows slightly weaker binding to H4K20ac and H2AK13ac and the short isoform to H4K8ac and H4K20ac (Figure 6B and Extended Data Figure 6B). To evaluate the interaction between H3K18ac and BRD3 further, we asked if H3K18ac affects BRD3 occupancy at known target genes. H3K18ac is produced by CBP/p300, which is also responsible for H3K27ac34. We treated hESCs with A485, which inhibits both H3K18ac and H3K27ac35, and with GNE049, which inhibits only H3K27ac35,36. BRD3 showed minimal interaction with H3K27ac (Extended Data Figure 6B), and we hypothesized that inhibition of H3K18ac and H3K27ac should have a greater effect on BRD3 occupancy than inhibition of H3K27ac alone. A485 reduced both H3K18ac and H3K27ac (Extended Data Figure 6C), and BRD3 occupancy was significantly reduced at the loci of genes previously identified as occupied by BRD3 in hESCs15, as compared to hESCs treated with GNE049 (Extended Data Figure 6D). These results suggest that BRD3 binds H3K18ac, prompting further investigation.
BRD3 and H3K18ac co-occupy genes that regulate pluripotency and differentiationWe then asked if the interaction between H3K18ac and BRD3 extends to native chromatin in endoderm differentiation. ChIP-seq analysis showed no evidence of BRD3 or H3K18ac at the DIGIT/GSC locus in hESCs. However, BRD3 occupies this locus with endoderm differentiation (Table S3). Mesendoderm gives rise to endoderm, and many endoderm genes are first activated in mesendoderm37,38. In mesendoderm, we observed H3K18ac in the same regions that are occupied by BRD3 in endoderm. In contrast, BRD3 occupies regions of H3K18ac in hESCs at the gene encoding the pluripotency factor SOX2, and the presence of both BRD3 and H3K18ac are reduced with endoderm/mesendoderm differentiation (Figure 6D). These findings show that BRD3 and H3K18ac can co-occupy genes in hESCs and shift to new targets with differentiation.
DIGIT is enriched in regions of chromatin modified by H3K18acBRD3 localizes to regions of chromatin marked by H3K18ac and interacts with DIGIT, suggesting that DIGIT may also localize to regions of H3K18ac. We adapted Cleavage Under Targets and Release Using Nuclease (CUT&RUN)39 to isolate RNA molecules that interact with histone modifications (Cleavage Under Targets and Release Using Nuclease to Assess Enrichment of RNA, CUT&RUNER) (Figure 6E). The CUT&RUN protocol uses micrococcal nuclease (MNase) to excise DNA at targeted regions. MNase can target both DNA and RNA; however, its RNase activity can be inhibited by heavy metal cations (Extended Data Figure 6E and 6F)40. We quantified enrichment of the lncRNAs MALAT1 and MEG3 as controls. As predicted, MALAT1 is enriched in regions modified by H3K4me341, while MEG3 is enriched in regions of H3K27me342 (Extended Data Figure 6G). We find that DIGIT demonstrates the greatest enrichment in regions modified by H3K18ac (Figure 6F). Enrichment of DIGIT was also observed to a lesser degree in regions modified by H3K4me3. GATA6-AS was enriched in regions of H3K4me3, while DEANR1 was enriched in regions of H3K18ac but to a lesser degree than DIGIT. These results show that BRD3 and DIGIT are both enriched in regions of chromatin modified by H3K18ac.
BRD3 promotes gene expression through occupancy of enhancersBRD3 primarily occupies promoters in hESCs and shows increased occupancy of enhancers with endoderm differentiation (Figure 7A and Extended Data Figure 7A) (Table S4). Key endoderm and mesendoderm genes are occupied by BRD3 and regulated by DIGIT. (Figure 7B and 7C). These regulatory genes are also located in regions of higher BRD3 occupancy (Figure 7D). BRD3 regions containing enhancers are also greater in size in endoderm compared to hESCs, in contrast to BRD3 regions containing promoters, which are maintained at similar sizes in endoderm and hESCs (Extended Data Figure 7B). These results suggest that upon endoderm differentiation, BRD3 shifts to occupy new, broader regions that tend to contain enhancers, including those that regulate genes controlling endoderm fate.It is possible that transcripts such as DIGIT, which are expressed from genes that are occupied by BRD3, may show interaction with BRD3 on RIP (Figure 1G) only because there is a higher concentration of the transcript near the gene as it is transcribed. However, we found no association between the level of gene occupancy by BRD3 (ChIP) and enrichment by RIP (Extended Data Figure 7C), suggesting that the interaction of BRD3 and DIGIT is regulated more by RNA sequence than the location of transcription relative to BRD3.
BRD3 and H3K18ac are associated across the genomeWe next compared sites of H3K18ac in mesendoderm differentiation43 with BRD3 occupancy during endoderm differentiation. Despite analyzing occupancy under slightly different stages of differentiation, we found that over 80% of regions occupied by BRD3 overlap with regions of H3K18ac (Figure 7E). In both hESCs and with endoderm/mesendoderm differentiation, regions occupied by BRD3 are modified by H3K18ac (Figure 7F and 7G). Approximately 15% of H3K18ac regions are unique in mesendoderm compared to hESCs, and 560 of these mesendoderm regions are newly occupied by BRD3 with endoderm differentiation. This group of genes newly marked by H3K18ac and BRD3 includes the key endoderm genes that are also regulated by DIGIT (Figure 7H). These results suggest that during differentiation, BRD3 shifts to regions newly modified by H3K18ac, which encompass genes regulated by DIGIT.
DIGIT recruits BRD3 to endoderm genesThe previous results suggest that DIGIT may recruit BRD3 to sites of H3K18ac to induce the expression of endoderm genes. We differentiated DIGIT-deficient (DIGITgfp/gfp) and wildtype hESCs toward endoderm to determine how BRD3 occupancy was affected by depletion of DIGIT. GSC, FOXA2 and SOX17 are co-occupied by BRD3 and H3K18ac (Figure 6C and 7G) and regulated by DIGIT (Figure 7B and 7C), and BRD3 occupancy at each of these genes was impaired with DIGIT depletion (Figure 8A). We also assessed both BRD3 occupancy at HEXIM2, a gene co-occupied by BRD3 and H3K18ac in hESCs and in endoderm but not regulated by DIGIT (Extended Data Figure 8), and BRD3 occupancy at PITX2 and ZAP70, genes that show new occupancy by BRD3 and H3K18ac with endoderm differentiation but are not regulated by DIGIT. In contrast to GSC, FOXA2 and SOX17, BRD3 occupancy at HEXIM2, PITX2 and ZAP70 was not reduced (Figure 8B), suggesting that DIGIT is required for the recruitment of BRD3 to endoderm genes (Figure 8C).
Discussion
Many lncRNAs interact with proteins to regulate gene expression44. Here we demonstrate that DIGIT interacts with BRD3 in phase-separated condensates to control gene expression and endoderm differentiation. BRD3 binds H3K18ac, and during endoderm differentiation BRD3 shifts from promoters to enhancers within regions also occupied by H3K18ac. BRD3 can co-occupy genes with H3K18ac independent of DIGIT (Figure 8B and Extended Data Figure 8), but BRD3 requires DIGIT to occupy regions of H3K18ac near a specific subset of genes (Figure 8A and 8C). Thus, the interaction with DIGIT determines the specificity of a set of BRD3 targets, through which BRD3 regulates endoderm differentiation.
In mouse endoderm differentiation, activin signaling leads to increased H3K18ac at the Gsc gene45. Acetylation of H3K18 at Gsc requires both SMAD4 and TRIM33, each of which interacts with SMAD2/3 in response to activin signaling, and H3K18ac may also act to recruit TRIM3346. Thus genome occupancy by Smad2/3 at new enhancers may lead to recruitment of CBP/p30047,48, induction of H3K18ac34, and recruitment of the BRD3-DIGIT complex to drive expression of Gsc and other SMAD2/3 target genes.
DIGIT interacts with the bromodomains of BRD3 (Figure 2F), and enhancer (e) RNAs interact with the bromodomains of BRD449. These studies investigating two different BET proteins in two different cell types suggest that in addition to recognizing acetylated histones, bromodomains may also interact broadly with RNAs. In both studies, depletion of noncoding RNAs inhibited BET protein occupancy and activity at specific genes. Future investigation will be required to elucidate how RNAs may affect recognition of acetylated histones.
RNAs can interact with proteins to form condensates26,27,50. The interaction between DIGIT and BRD3 expands our understanding of the involvement of lncRNAs in condensates51,52 and demonstrates a role for lncRNAs in transcriptional phase-separated condensates. BRD4 forms phase-separated condensates in association with Mediator to regulate gene expression17, and BRD2, BRD3 and BRD4 form distinct phase-separated condensates during endoderm differentiation. DIGIT promotes the formation of BRD3 condensates in endoderm differentiation. BRD3 also interacts with other RNA transcripts in addition to DIGIT, and we anticipate future studies will identify other RNA partners that preferentially interact with individual BET proteins to promote the formation of condensates in specific cell types.
Our findings indicate that the interactions between BET proteins and lncRNAs help specify gene targets. This interaction is not limited to polyA RNAs, as eRNAs can also bind BET proteins49. Interactions with specific RNA transcripts may control the regulation of subsets of genes targeted by BET proteins, and changes in RNA species between different cell types may add an additional layer of cell-type-specific control to BET proteins.
Extended Data
Extended Data Fig. 1Optimization of RNA pull-down, endoderm differentiation, and evaluation of GATA6-AS in endoderm.(A) Recovery of DIGIT-4S1m versus endogenous GAPDH mRNA with increasing concentrations of KCl. RNA recovered with 250 mM KCl is set to 100 for each RNA species. Error bars represent the standard deviation of n=3 independent experiments. (B) Enrichment of SCRM-4xS1m after streptavidin pull-down as quantified by qRT-PCR. The transcript level in input was set to 1.0. RNA levels are normalized to GAPDH. **** indicates p <0.0001 (Student’s t-test, n=3 independent experiments). Box plots show the first and third quartiles, median (horizontal line), and minimum and maximum values (whiskers). (C) Immunostaining shows the differentiation of hESCs to definitive endoderm (DE). FOXA2 (red) and SOX17 (green) are used as markers of definitive endoderm. SOX2 (yellow) is used as a marker of pluripotency. Hoechst staining (blue) marks nuclei. Scale bar represents 100 μm. This experiment was performed twice with similar results. (D) Flow cytometry plots show the population of cells that are CXCR4 and c-KIT double-positive in hESCs and DE cells generated using the high-efficiency DE differentiation protocol1. This experiment was performed three times with similar results. (E) The diagram shows the gene encoding lncRNA GATA6-AS, which is divergently transcribed from the gene encoding GATA6. Annotated GATA6-AS transcripts are shown in red and the transcript cloned in DE cells is shown in black. (F) qRT-PCR shows levels of GATA6-AS in hESCs and on the indicated days of endoderm differentiation. Box plots show the first and third quartiles, median (horizontal line), and minimum and maximum values (whiskers). **** indicates p <0.0001 compared to day 0 (One-way ANOVA, n=4 independent experiments). Statistical source data are provided in Source data extended data Fig. 1.
Extended Data Figure 2.RIP-seq, expression of BET proteins in endoderm, and interactions with SMARCD1.(A) RIP shows the levels of DIGIT following SMARCD1 and IgG immunoprecipitation. *** indicates p<0.001 n=3 independent experiments. Box plots show the first and third quartiles, median (horizontal line), and minimum and maximum values (whiskers). (B) Co-immunoprecipitation followed by immunoblotting shows the interaction of BRD3 and SMARCD1. This experiment was performed twice with similar results. (C) Volcano plots show transcripts enriched with BRD3 RIP. Transcripts from BRD3 RIP were normalized to IgG RIP for endoderm cells (DE, Figure 1G) and normalized to total nuclear RNA (input), left. BRD3 RIP normalized to IgG (center) and input (right) are shown for hESCs. The 10 most enriched transcripts in common between IgG and input for hESCs are labeled on the volcano plots. Points are colored to indicate different thresholds as labeled on the far right. RIP-seq was performed in two independent samples and pooled for analysis. (D) Volcano plots show lncRNA transcripts enriched with BRD3 RIP when normalized to IgG or input in DE (left) and hESCs (right). lncRNA transcripts in common between IgG and input controls are labeled (purple). Points are shaded to indicate different thresholds as in (C). RIP-seq was performed in two independent samples and pooled for analysis.(E) The table (left) shows normalized expression values (RPKM) in endoderm differentiation2. Immunoblot (right) shows the protein levels of BET proteins with differentiation. Beta-Actin (ACTB) is used as a loading control. This experiment was performed twice with similar results. (F) Immunoprecipitation was performed using antibodies specific to each BET protein. IgG serves as a control. This experiment was performed twice with similar results. Unprocessed blots and statistical source data are provided in Source data extended data Fig. 2.
Extended Data Figure 3.Generation of recombinant BRD3 and GFP, production of Cy-5 labeled RNAs, EMSA replicate, localization of BRD3 domains, and immunoprecipitation of BRD3 domains.(A) Immunoblot was performed to detect recombinant FLAG-mEGFP-BRD3 (long isoform) and FLAG-mEGFP using an anti-GFP antibody (left) and an anti-BRD3 antibody (right). (B) Fluorescent detection of the Cy5-labeled DIGIT and SCRM on a 1% bleach-agarose gel. Experiments in A and B were performed twice with similar results. (C) Replicate electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) of in vitro transcribed DIGIT (left, top) and SCRM (left, bottom), which are labeled with Cy5 and incubated with recombinant BRD3. Migration was visualized on the right by quantifying the signal for DIGIT (top) or SCRM (bottom) across the gel. Migration of 0 on the x-axis was defined by the peak of DIGIT and SCRM with 0 nM BRD3 protein, and migration of 100 was defined by the peak of DIGIT and SCRM with 2048 nM BRD3 protein. This experiment shows a second replicate of Figure 2C. (D) The dissociation constants (Kd) were calculated for (C). (E) Fluorescence microscopy shows the nuclear localization of ectopically expressed GFP, GFP fused to full-length BRD3, and GFP fused to the indicated bromodomains (BD) or extra terminal (ET) domains of BRD3 in HEK 293 cells. Scale bar represents 20 μm. This experiment was performed twice with similar results. (F) Immunoprecipitation followed by immunoblotting using an antibody against GFP shows the precipitation of the proteins described in (E). This experiment was performed twice with similar results. Unprocessed blots are provided in Source data extended data Fig. 3.
Extended Data Figure 4.Prediction of ordered/disordered protein structures, strategy for tagging endogenous BRD3 with mEGFP, formation of BRD3 puncta in hESCs, and in vitro droplet formation.(A) PONDR VSL2 plots showing the ordered and disordered regions of the long (left) and short (middle) isoforms of BRD3, and BRD2 (right). (B) Creation of mEGFP-BRD3 fusion protein. The cDNA encoding mEGFP was inserted at the N-terminus of BRD3. This terminus is shared by the long and short isoforms of BRD3. The site targeted by gRNA is indicated with an arrow. The start of the coding sequence (CDS) is indicated, and the mEGFP cDNA is inserted in frame after the start codon. (C) Design of the homology vector for the insertion of mEGFP. The genomic locations of homology arms are indicated. Arrow indicates that mEGFP was inserted after the start codon for BRD3. (D) Immunoblot using anti-BRD3 antibody confirms the generation of mEGFP-BRD3 fused protein. hESCs were lysed and IP was performed using an IgG isotype control and an antibody recognizing GFP. Total cell lysates (input) and the IPs were then probed with an anti-BRD3 antibody. This experiment was performed twice with similar results. (E) Immunofluorescence of an hESC showing BRD3 puncta (green) in the nucleus (blue). Scale bar represents 10 μm. This experiment was performed twice with similar results. (F) Droplet assay shows the formation of mEGFP-BRD3 droplets in the presence of three different molecular crowding agents. Scale bar represents 2 μm. This experiment was performed three times with similar results. (G) Fluorescent detection of the Cy3-labeled DIGIT and SCRM on a 1% bleach-agarose gel. This experiment was performed twice with similar results.
Extended Data Figure 5.Homology construct for targeting BRD3, and analysis of long and short isoforms of BRD3.(A) Map of the homology construct for insertion of a puromycin resistance cassette and a stop codon cassette downstream of the sixth codon of the gene encoding BRD3. (B) hESCs were differentiated towards DE for three days prior to qRT-PCR. Primers that uniquely recognize either the long (left) or short (right) isoforms of BRD3 were used for amplification. Cells were also transfected with plasmids expressing the long (left) and short (right) isoforms of BRD3 as positive (+) controls for the primers. The long isoform of BRD3 is detected with DE differentiation while the short isoform is not detected. ACTB was used as a control. This experiment was performed twice with similar results. (C) Wildtype and BRD3−/− hESCs were transfected with plasmids expressing GFP (green), the short isoform of BRD3 (yellow), and the long isoform of BRD3 (orange). Expression of CXCR4 and SOX17 was quantified by qRT-PCR after three days of DE differentiation. Ectopic expression of both the long and short isoform of BRD3 rescued expression of CXCR4 and SOX17. * indicates p<0.05 (n=3 independent experiments). Box plots show the first and third quartiles, median (horizontal line), and minimum and maximum values (whiskers). Statistical source data are provided in Source data extended data Fig. 5
Extended Data Figure 6.Binding of BRD3 to modified histones, effects of inhibition of P300 on the enrichment of BRD3, the activity of MNase in presence of Ba+2 and Sr+2 cations, and enrichment of lncRNAs in specific histone modifications.(A) Peptide arrays show the binding of recombinant BRD3 to histone modifications. (B) Spot intensity of BRD3 (long and short isoforms, top and bottom respectively) binding to the top ten histone modifications as quantified by image processing software (see Materials and Methods). (C) Immunoblots to detect the levels of acetylation on H3K18 and H3K27, as well as levels of BRD3 and total H3 in hESCs treated with DMSO, A485, or GNE049. This experiment was performed twice with similar results. (D) CUT&RUN followed by qPCR shows the enrichment of BRD3 at the HEXIM2 and ZFP36L1 loci in hESCs. Box plots show the first and third quartiles, median (horizontal line), and minimum and maximum values (whiskers). *** indicates p <0.001 (Student’s t-test, n=3 independent experiments). (E) RNase activity of MNase in the presence of Ba2+ and Sr2+ cations. This experiment was performed twice with similar results. (F) DNase activity of MNase in the presence of Ba2+ and Sr2+ cations. This experiment was performed twice with similar results. (G) CUT&RUNER followed by qPCR shows the enrichment of MALAT1 and MEG3 transcripts in IgG control, markers of gene activation (H3K4me3 and H3K18ac) and repression (H3K27me3). Box plots show the first and third quartiles, median (horizontal line), and minimum and maximum values (whiskers). * indicates p < 0.05, *** indicates p <0.001, and **** indicates p < 0.0001 compared to IgG (Student’s t-test, n=3 independent experiments). Statistical source data are provided in Source data extended data Fig. 6.
Extended Data Figure 7.BRD3 occupies endoderm genes and enhancers and interaction between BRD3 and DIGIT is not dependent on location of transcription.(A) The number of BRD3 regions (y-axis) that contain promoters and enhancers are shown for hESCs (white) and endoderm cells (black). BRD3 regions are defined as containing promoters if the region is located within 2kb of a transcription start site (TSS). BRD3 regions are defined as containing enhancers if the region overlaps with enhancers defined by H3K27ac. Regions that contain both promoters and enhancers are counted in both categories. In Figure 7A, BRD3 regions are first evaluated for association with promoters. Regions that are not associated with promoters are then evaluated for association with enhancers (See Supplementary Methods). Data from two independent BRD3 ChIPs were pooled for analysis of hESCs and DE. (B) Box plots show the length of regions occupied by BRD3 for the categories described in (A). The bold horizontal line represents the median for each box plot. The lower edge of the box represents the first quartile (Q1) and the upper edge of the box represents the third quartile (Q3). The lower whiskers represent Q1–1.5*(Q3-Q1) and the upper whisker represents Q3+1.5*(Q3-Q1). The width of each box is proportional to the number of BRD3 regions in each category. Data from two independent BRD3 ChIPs were pooled for analysis of hESCs and DE. The width of each box is proportional to the number of BRD3 regions in each category. Data from two independent BRD3 ChIPs were pooled for analysis of hESCs and DE. (C) Transcript enrichment from BRD3 RIP in DE vs IgG control (Figure 1G, y-axis) is shown for each gene occupied by BRD3 in DE (x-axis). Endoderm genes are labeled in red. Data from two independent BRD3 ChIPs and two independent BRD3 RIPs were pooled for analysis.
Extended Data Figure 8.BRD3 occupancy at genes not regulated by DIGIT.ChIP-seq data shows H3K18ac (top, green) and BRD3 occupancy (bottom, black) at HEXIM2, PITX2/PANCR and ZAP70 in hESCs and endoderm/mesendoderm cells. BRD3 occupies HEXIM2 in hESCs and mesendoderm/endoderm. BRD3 occupies PITX2/PANCR and ZAP70 in mesendoderm/endoderm but not in hESCs. Data from two independent BRD3 ChIPs were pooled for analysis. H3K18ac was analyzed from GSE16256.
Supplementary Material
Supplementary Table 1
Supplementary Table 2
Supplementarly Table 3
Supplementary Table 4
Supplementary Table 5
Supplementary Table 6
Source Data Fig 1
Source Data Fig 3
Source Data Fig 2
Source Data Fig 4
Source Data Fig 5
Source Data Fig 6
Source Data Fig 7
Source Data Fig 8
Source Data Fig 1 Western Blot
Source Data Fig 2 Western Blot
Source Data Fig 5 Western Blot
Source Data Extended Data Fig 1
Source Data Extended Data Fig 2
Source Data Extended Data Fig 2 Western Blot
Source Data Extended Data Fig 3
Source Data Extended Data Fig 4
Source Data Extended Data Fig 5
Source Data Extended Data Fig 6
Source Data Extended Data Fig 6 Western Blot
Supplementary Information (Fig 1)
Reporting Summary
1
