Overview of transgenerational inheritance
Evolution progresses through an interplay between two major forces, selection and variation. Since the formulation of the Modern Synthesis the theory holds that the environment is limited in its contribution to the evolutionary course of action – it affects selection, but not the degree of variation [1,2]. However, recent discoveries in epigenetics suggest that the environment may influence variability as well [1]. If the parental environment is predictive of the conditions that the progeny will face (often for sessile or short-lived organisms), epigenetic responses can change the output of the encoded genetic information in an adaptive manner [3]. For example, the water flea Daphnia changes its normal developmental course and develops a “helmet” that protects it from predators, if it is born to a mother that survived a similar attack [4].
Over the years, controversy surrounded the study of environmentally affected transgenerational inheritance. Today, an improved understanding of epigenetic mechanisms at the molecular level has provided a logical background to explain how, heretically, an adaptive acquired trait could become heritable [5]. Several epigenetic mechanisms could regulate the expression of relevant genes during transgenerational inheritance including DNA methylation, histone modification, and transmission of regulatory RNAs. Moreover, in many organisms, these pathways appear to be interconnected [5–8].
This review will concentrate on recent discoveries that establish a role for small RNAs in transgenerational transmission of acquired defense. Furthermore, exciting examples of RNA-mediated non-Mendelian genetic effects will be discussed, along with their possible implications for the study of evolution and immunology.
RNA-mediated gene silencing and inheritance
Since the original discovery that small RNAs derived from exogenously-provided double stranded RNA (dsRNA) can regulate gene expression via RNA interference (RNAi), additional endogenous reactive small RNAs species have been uncovered (reviewed in [9]). Small RNA species including microRNAs (miRNAs), PIWI Proteins-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) and endogenous small interfering RNAs (endo-siRNAs), are 20–30 base pair long and categorized by the specific Argonautes with which they associate [10]. These small RNA species engage with multiple RNA-binding proteins to affect the expression of coding genes, transposons, viruses, and aberrant RNAs. Furthermore, these small RNAs possess unique qualities that promote a long-lasting, and even transgenerational influence: their nuclear activity, their ability to become amplified through the action of RNA Dependent RNA Polymerases (RdRPs) and their ability to undergo stabilizing post-transcriptional modifications (Figure. 1 and Text box).
Another incredible quality of small RNAs that expands their potential to serve as transgenerational carriers of somatically-acquired traits, is the movement of certain regulatory RNA molecules between different cells and tissues [11]. In C.elegans, RNAi is maintained in the next generation of worms that are fed bacteria expressing dsRNA [12]. Thus, silencing travels from the site of injection to other tissues, including the germline. This observation challenges an important principle in evolutionary biology known as the “Weismann Barrier” (also termed “The second law of biology”), according to which genetic information cannot pass from the soma to the germline [13]. Recently it was demonstrated that higher organisms also use RNAi to silence genes in a non-cell autonomous manner [14,15], suggesting that soma-germline RNA-mediated communication could be widely conserved.
While in most cases wild-type gene activity is restored to baseline after dsRNA exposure in the second generation, targeting certain genes can result in lasting interference [16]. Several factors influence the persistency of RNAi inheritance, and segregation of the effect does not follow Mendel’s rules of heredity - I will now briefly describe the dynamics of this unusual genetic process.
In C.elegans RNAi is inherited as a dominant factor [16] in both the oocyte and the sperm, and the silencing can be more persistent when transmitted through the male germline [17]. This is suppressing since the sperm’s volume is less than 1% of the volume of oocyte. It was hypothesized that the sperm carries large amounts of RNA packed in its perinuclear “halo” [17]. Interestingly, in worms distinct endo-siRNAs are inherited from the father and the mother [18].
In plants, RNAi acts both post and pre-transcriptionally. For example, RNAi can result in heritable DNA methylation, a process that is dependent on the Met1 methyltransferase [19]. Stable RNAi-mediated methylation of DNA cannot explain inheritance seen in worms, since in C.elegans cytosine methylation does not seem to occur [20] suggesting alternative RNAi inheritance mechanisms are utilized as well. Indeed, unlike epigenetic effects which are mediated by DNA modifications, heritable RNAi effects were shown to propagate to the next generation of worms as a diffusible epigenetic element (demonstrated using animals in which deletions were introduced to remove the target DNA), suggesting that in C.elegans the chromosomal locus is either redundant or dispensable for transmission of transgenerational memory [16,17,21]. Recent evidence in worms suggests, however, that RNAi inheritance can involve a nuclear RNAi mechanism and chromatin remodeling genes as well [22]. RNAi inheritance maintained by chromatin remodeling factors (HDA-4, K03D10.3, ISW-1 and MRG-1 [22]) was shown to persist almost indefinitely (>80 generations) in the absence of the original trigger [22]. However, this persistent RNAi-dependent effect was only seen in a small minority of genes (13 out of 171 tested genes were inheritably silenced) [22] suggesting that, for reasons which currently unknown, certain genes are more capable of inheriting RNAi over others. While chromatin remodeling appears to play an important role in epigenetic inheritance it appears that the heterochromatin state is not directly inherited but reestablished in the progeny by small RNAs [23]. This was shown to be the case in worms by Burton et al., who found that although treatment of worms with dsRNA induces heritable deposition of repressive chromatin marks in the progeny, these heritable siRNAs are detectable before the chromatin marks [23]
How can heritable small RNAs persist over many generations? Each nematode produces hundreds of progeny, and therefore small RNAs must be amplified to overcome the transgenerational dilution effect that expands logarithmically. Indeed, in worms which are mutants for the RdRP RRF-1, inherited RNAi diminishes after 2 generations, indicating the RNA amplification is required for long-term transgenerational RNAi effects [21,24]. In addition, it was recently demonstrated that the RRF-1 RdRP is required for effective transgenerational targeting of chromatin [25]. The inherited effect of RNAi on chromatin was shown to be mediated by HRDE-1 (heritable RNAi defective-1, also named WAGO-9; for Worm Specific Argonaute 9) and Nuclear RNAi factors (NRDEs, for Nuclear RNAi Defective). HRDE-1 is a germline-expressed Argonaute protein that binds secondary siRNAs, and while it is required for efficient RNAi inheritance, it is dispensable for RNAi per se [26–28]. HRDE-1 and NRDE proteins probably function in consolidating transgenerational RNAi “memory”, rather than in the actual shuttling of the heritable RNA agent across generations. Indeed, HRDE-1 and NRDE mutant parents are still capable of transmitting RNAi to their progeny, while mutant progeny is incapable of establishing RNAi using the inherited small RNAs received from wild-type parents [23,27,29]. Moreover, HRDE-1 is found in oocytes nuclei but not in differentiated sperm nuclei [27], although RNAi is most efficiently transmitted via sperm [17]. In summary, HRDE-1 and NRDE proteins are important for consolidation of the inherited response, which is triggered by small RNAs, and established by chromatin remodeling [6,27].
Inherited immunity
The active nature of transgenerational small RNA transmission, and the discovery of an elaborate set of proteins which are dedicated to RNAi inheritance but not to RNAi per se, suggests that inherited RNAi was not evolved solely to allow artificial gene silencing of multiple generations in the lab. Thus, the question remains – what is the biological purpose of small RNA inheritance? Recent discoveries provide a clue: in multiple organisms, including bacteria, plants, and animals, inherited small RNAs establish the foundation for transgenerational genome immunity.
Inherited anti-viral immunityA link between RNAi and anti-viral defense was recently discerned in C. elegans, which was considered for many years to be resistant to all known viruses [30]. RNAi mutants, but not wild type worms, were shown to be susceptible to artificial viral replication [31–33], and recently RNAi-dependency was proven essential for resistance against a natural virus (the Orsay virus) as well [34]. Small RNAs targeting viral genomes (viRNA) accumulate in wild type infected worms, but not mutant worms [35,36]. Moreover, it was shown that viRNAs are capable of being transmitted between generations of worms [21,24]. RNAi heterozygous mutant worms, which are functionally competent, can generate anti-viral RNAi immunity that protects their homozygous RNAi-mutant progeny from replication of a transgenic Flock House Virus (FHV) for multiple generations [21]. Recent experiments suggest that C.elegans worms which are infected with the natural Orsay virus also develop RNAi-based protection which is accumulated over generations, so that the progeny of the infected worms is essentially immuned (Personal communication [37]). Thus, an acquired trait, anti-viral immunity, is transferred between generations via a non-Mendelian genetic mechanism, and in direct defiance of Weismann’s law [21].
Inherited protection against transposonspiRNA-mediated transposon regulation provides interesting examples for transgenerational immunity and for genetic interactions between the soma and the germline. For example, while piRNAs act mostly in germ cells, in Drosophila, somatic piRNAs eliminate a particular transposon even prior to colonization of the reproductive organs. In somatic follicle cells, antisense piRNAs are produced from a Flamenco locus to repress gypsy elements (long terminal repeat reteroviruses), which are able to travel from the soma in viral particles to the germ cells. By blocking selfish genes even before they get to the germline, piRNA-mediated repression might prevent transgenerational mobilization and evolution of these and other mobile elements [38]. piRNAs are also maternally-inherited in Drosophila. This maternal deposition is important for protection of the F1 generation against transposons (and hybrid dysgenesis) [39]. Unlike maternally-inherited proteins, which dilute quickly over generations, piRNAs are amplifiable, and the maternally-deposited piRNAs in flies persist long into adulthood [39]. Moreover, amplification mechanisms allow piRNAs to establish multigenerational defense against a variety of selfish elements [26,28,40,41]. piRNA amplification is achieved by different mechanisms in different organisms. In C.elegans piRNAs give rise to secondary endo-siRNAs via the action of RdRPs [42]. In flies and mice piRNA-mediated silencing is amplified by a different process termed “Ping-Pong” [43].Long-term piRNA inheritance appears to be well conserved: recently it was shown that piRNAs are inherited for 50 generations in Drosophila [40], and for at least two generations in Danio rerio [44]. While piRNAs are involved in many inherited immunity effects, they are obviously not central to all such mechanisms. piRNAs are absent in several organisms that display heritable genome immunity, such as plants, fungi, and even in some worms, for example in the parasitic nematode, Ascaris suum, a relative of C.elegans [45,46].
Manipulation of transgenerational immunitySmall RNA-based surveillance cannot eliminate all the genetic parasites, since some mobile elements utilize different techniques to overcome, or even manipulate RNAi, to escape inherited immunity. Viruses encode a variety of proteins named Viral Suppressors of RNA Silencing (VSRs) to block the host’s RNAi system [47]. In plants, a class 1 RNase III VSR from sweet potato chlorotic stunt virus inhibits anti-viral RNAi by disabling siRNA amplification by the RdRP RDR6 [48]. Similarly, the Tomato yellow leaf curl virus VSR V2 outcompetes the SUPPRESSOR OF GENE SILENCING 3 (SGS3) protein for binding to the 5’ overhang of dsRNAs, thus preventing its interaction which is required for initiating RdRP-mediated amplification of anti-viral viRNAs [49]. Inhibition of host RdRPs should, in theory, prevent anti-viral RNAi from persisting for long-periods of time, and from acting transgenerationally.While many examples for transgenerational protection against viruses exist, more notably in plants [3,50], certain epigenetic effects are found that “favor” invading viruses and establish an inherited susceptibility. For example, seeds from injured ancestors were more susceptible to infections by a plant virus [51]. Specifically, some of the signaling cascades that viruses hijack are used by plants to transgenerationally regulate endogenous genes. In A. thaliana, the same SGS3 protein that is outcompeted by the viral protein V2 for dsRNA binding is inhibited by temperature increase. Plants naturally use this mechanism to accustom themselves quickly to changes in temperature: Since SGS3 is required for siRNA production and the ensuing transgenerational post-transcriptional gene-silencing program that they enforce, it was shown that through inhibition of SGS3 temperature-shifts inhibit siRNAs from affecting the next generation [52]. In addition to suppressing RNAi in worms and plants, even in mammalian systems, it was shown that certain viruses hijack the host’s RNAi system to directly silence endogenous immunity genes, and achieve immunoevasion [53].Virus-host interactions are moreover complicated by situations of persistent infections, when the host can sometimes benefit from “living with the (viral) enemy”, and can even gain from internalization of RNA viruses in to the genome, using the cell’s own reverse transcription abilities [54]. While the underlying mechanisms are unknown, it was discovered that the human genome contains bits and pieces of non-retrovirus RNA viruses [55,56]. A clue to the mechanism might be found in Drosophila, where in cells such integration was shown to be achieved by the reverse transcriptase activity of transposons, resulting in establishment of an anti-viral RNAi response [57]. Therefore, the effectivity of small RNAs-based immunity changes for different mobile elements, from host to host, and from environment to environment, as is evident by the relative genome fraction that the different genomic parasites take up in different organisms [58].In addition to inherited viRNAs and piRNAs, other inherited small RNA species enable transgenerational immunity not only against viruses and transposons, but also, at least in plants, against animal predators. Small RNAs were demonstrated to mediate resistance in Wild radish (Raphanus raphanistrum) against lepidopteran herbivory that is prolonged for at least two generations [51]. This biotic attack is countered by the production of small RNAs, which spread to the developing seed and establish stable epigenetic protection. Unlike the situation in C.elegans, inherited siRNA-mediated protection in plants is hypothesized to act also by the methylation of specific cytosines, which persist over generations [19]. In summary, it appears that inherited small RNAs are involved in multiple regulatory pathways central to immunity, across the tree of life.
Strategies for establishing transgenerational genome immunity
In general, there are two ways to use prior infections to protect the progeny: the organism can either make a heritable “black list” of all the foreign genes that its ancestors encountered, which must be suppressed, or prepare a “guest list” of all the familial self genes that need be to expressed. Evidences for the existence of both strategies are detailed below.
Black list: Inherited VaccinesAn important strategy for identifying parasitic elements is to take advantage of the virus’s or the transposons’s need to replicate and mobilize between cells or between different parts of the genome [43]. In Drosophila germ cells specific genomic loci act as “traps” catching transposons that land in them when the mobile element jumps. Once the transposon is captured, its expression is restricted, since the DNA is wrapped up by heterochromatin. piRNAs that are synthesized from the transposon’s landing site continuously recruit chromatin remodeling genes to the site. This allows the heterochromatin state to remain permanent after both mitotic and meiotic cell divisions. Also, once piRNAs have been synthesized, they can prevent expression of homologous genetic parasites [43]. Since piRNAs are amplifiable, this transposon memorization is transgenerational. While anti-transposon piRNAs are produced almost exclusively in germ cells, where transposons mobilization is especially deleterious, in A. thaliana 21 bp siRNAs raised against transposons in the germline supporting companion cells function non-cell autonomously to silence transposons in the sperm [59].In addition to mobilization, the repetitive nature of transposons leads to bidirectional transcription and therefore to dsRNA formation. For non-retrovirus RNA viruses, synthesis of dsRNA intermediates is a prerequisite for reproduction. Therefore, the immune system surveys dsRNA, since it is a typical product of parasitic elements, and possibly a “danger” signal [60]. The dsRNA, which transposons and RNA viruses produce, serves as a substrate for the RNAi machinery, leading to the production of heritable inhibitory viRNA and piRNA “memories” [21,43,60,61], as discussed above.An analogous identification mechanism also exists in bacteria. Invading DNA phages can be chopped up and packed into specific genomic areas called Clustered Regularly Interspaced Short Palindromic Repeats (CRISPR) where they can be silenced, and their genomes “memorized” [62]. In subsequent bacterial generations, CRISPR RNAs transcribed from these CRISPR loci will prime the bacteria’s defense against newly infecting phages, thus leading to their elimination [63].Transposons “trapping”, viRNA inheritance, and phage integration in CRISPR loci, are mechanisms in which regulatory RNAs participate to help establish what I term “Inherited Vaccination”, a transgenerational “Black List” of genetic parasites that need to be eliminated (Figure. 2). The term “Vaccine” might seem unfitting at first since the process does not involve production of antibodies or clonal populations of specialized immune cells, however, functionally, small RNA-mediated inherited immunity is indeed a form of vaccination.
Guest List: RNA LicensingThe second strategy that an organism can use to produce inherited immunity could be viewed as the mirror image of the first strategy – make a small RNA-based “Guest List” of endogenous genes, instead of a “black list” of invading elements.The idea that an organism produces an RNA-encoded, heritable list of all helpful genetic information (“RNA Cache”) was validated both in unicellular Oxytricha trifallax, and in animals [64].Oxytricha ciliates have two genomes packed inside two nuclei, a somatic one that encodes for all the vegetative growth functions, and a germline one that is responsible for sexual reproduction [64]. During the development of the somatic nucleus, Oxytricha gets rid of all parasitic DNA elements, which compose the majority of the germline DNA (>95%). It was known that RNA guides DNA rearrangements in Oxytricha [65], however only recently it was shown that piRNAs are central to this process [66]. piRNAs that match genes present in the somatic genome are transgenerationally inherited from the maternal nucleus. Since these piRNAs correspond to genes that were previously present in the soma, they in fact point to genes that are “safe” to express, because the prior generations that expressed those genes were able to survive and produce progeny. Thus, Oxytricha’s piRNAs can recognize “self” (and “safe”) genes, and retain these corresponding DNA sequences (<5%) in later generations. This model w as validated when synthesized piRNAs that match regions that are otherwise deleted were injected into Oxytricha cells. It was shown that these artificially-produced piRNAs instruct the germline to refrain from deleting the corresponding DNA sequences, so that these DNA regions are kept in later generations [66]. Thus, if RNAi-mediated immunity is normally thought of as a strategy to dispose of “foreign” sequences, the Oxytricha’s RNAi system does the opposite – it protects its genome by discarding its entire somatic DNA, and licensing the inclusion of self-genes only.The “RNA cache” idea was dubbed later “RNA licensing”, when it was demonstrated in C.elegans that an RNA transcript of the gene fem-1, which is a sex determining factor, needs to be transcribed in the mother, to “license” the expression of the fem-1 allele in the zygotic germline._Introduction of a fem-1 deletion which eliminated mRNA production in the mother resulted in the production of feminized germline in the heterozygous progeny [67]. Similarly to the experiments done in Oxytricha, injection of fem-1 RNA (even when the RNA was incapable of encoding for a protein) into the maternal germline was enough to rescue the deficiency in the offspring. The presence or absence of the maternal RNA produced a heritable effect, which suggested the maternal fem-1 RNA prevents epigenetic silencing in the next generations, and that the underling mechanism may be a way to protect the identity and integrity of the germline [67].Based on recent studies in C.elegans, it seems reasonable to speculate that the RNA agents that mediate such epigenetic licensing are small RNAs. A number of groups have now shown that heritable worm PRG-1-bound piRNAs (a worm PIWI protein) scan and silence foreign elements by inducing chromatin remodeling in the germline [26–28,41]. One group suggested that small RNAs, which are bound by different Argonaute proteins, serve as epigenetic memories of “self” and “nonself” RNAs. piRNAs, according to this theory, silence the expression of genes which are not already marked by endo-siRNAs (bound by the Argonaute CSR-1), in a heritable manner that persists for multiple generations [26]. piRNAs arise in C.elegans primarily from two clusters on chromosome IV, but nevertheless, according to this model, possess the capacity to downregulate the expression of every foreign genetic element, regardless of sequence composition. The theory holds that piRNAs are granted with such incredible diversity since they require only partial complementary to their targets. Since the worm’s piRNA pool has a limited content to cover every imaginable foreign sequence, these piRNAs (which are only 21 bp long) must be very promiscuous, requiring only ~80% identity for target binding [26,28].In summary, it is likely that different organisms protect their genomes by utilizing specialized small RNA-based mechanisms that enable both “Black” and “Guest” listing strategies.
Concluding remarks
Earlier in the 20th century it was suggested that immunity could be heritable [68]. However, the heritable effects that were documented in the past remain extremely controversial, especially due to the fact that no plausible transmission mechanism was suggested. On the contrary, the discoveries of genome protective and transgenerationally transmitted small RNAs stand on solid ground - previous research efforts have unequivocally demonstrated that small RNAs are heritable, and provided insights into the different mechanisms that contribute to the persistency of RNAi.
While a myriad of examples exists for the involvement of inherited small RNAs in defending the genome from threats that come from the “outside” (genomic parasites), it is very possible that transgenerationally-transmitted regulatory RNAs play other “in house” roles as well. Since small RNA could be transcribed in response to different environmental challenges, one hypothesis is that heritable RNA, originally evolved to provide immunity, further allows organisms to tune down the levels of endogenous genes that are harmful for growth or reproduction in a changing surroundings [21,23]. For example, it was recently shown that the bacterial immune system, CRISPR, is also utilized to regulate endogenous bacterial genes [69]. Thus it is possible that the principles that enable heritable acquired immune resistance contribute to the evolution of many additional traits.
