INTRODUCTION
The ADAMTS (a disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin motifs) family includes 19 secreted metalloproteinases that modify extracellular components and play important roles in the regulation of multiple physiological processes and pathological conditions, such as tissue morphogenesis, fertility, inflammation, tumorigenesis, and vascular functions (Porter et al., 2005; Apte, 2009; Wei et al., 2014; Kelwick et al., 2015). ADAMTSs are highly expressed in the spinal cord, brain stem, hippocampus, striatum, and cortex (Gottschall and Howell, 2015). Most ADAMTSs are produced by astrocytes, neurons, and microglia (Lemarchant et al., 2013). The functions of ADAMTSs in the central nervous system (CNS) remain unclear. However, it has been shown that ADAMTSs (ADAMTS-1, −4, −5, −9) play a role in recovery and repair following spinal cord injury and seizure-induced neural damage by stimulating axonal outgrowth, and enhancing synaptic plasticity in the brain (Lemarchant et al., 2013; Gottschall and Howell, 2015).
ADAMTS18, an orphan ADAMTS, remains to be characterized with regard to its functions and substrates. In humans, ADAMTS18 mutations have been linked to tumorigenesis (Jin et al., 2007), developmental eye disorders (Aldahmesh et al., 2011, 2013; Peluso et al., 2013), and reduced bone mineral density (BMD) (Xiong et al., 2009). ADAMTS18 is most highly expressed in the brain (Apte, 2009; Wei et al., 2014). A genome-wide association study (GWAS) of 542,050 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in healthy people of 72–74 years old showed that ADAMTS18 is associated with white matter integrity in the brain (Lopez et al., 2012). Among the SNPs, rs7192208, located in an intron of the ADAMTS18 gene, has the strongest association. However, the roles of ADAMTS18 on CNS development and functions remain unclear.
ADAMTS18 is relatively well conserved in evolution. Murine ADAMTS18 is 89% homologous with human ADAMTS18 (https://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). To elucidate its function, we generated an Adamts18 KO mouse strain (Lu et al., 2017). In this study, we use this mouse model to determine the functions of ADAMTS18 in brain development. We demonstrated for the first time that ADAMTS18 plays a crucial role in neuronal morphogenesis and emotional control in mice.
EXPERIMENTAL PROCEDURES
ReagentsAll reagents were purchased from Sigma–Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA) unless otherwise indicated. Primary antibodies used in this study are listed in Table 1.
AnimalsAdamts18 KO and wild-type (WT) mice with the C57BL/6/129Sv background were generated and genotyped as previously described (Lu et al., 2017). Male mice at 8–10 weeks of age were used for all behavioral tests. Animals were maintained on a 12-h light/dark schedule (lights on at 06:00) in a specific pathogen-free facility. Mice for behavioral tests were housed in groups of 5 mice per cage. All behavioral tests were blinded to the genotype of mice and performed during the light phase between 09:00 and 17:00. Mice were habituated to the testing rooms for 2 h before tests. All procedures for animal experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of East China Normal University (ECNU).
Rt-PCRTotal RNA was extracted from brain tissues using TRNzol-A reagent (TIANGEN, Beijing, China) and then reversely transcribed to cDNA using the FastQuant RT kit (TIANGEN). An Adamts18 cDNA fragment was amplified using the following primers: 5′-TCCTCATCT CACCGCTACCTCA-3′ (forward); and 5′-GGTCCCATCTTT GAACAGGCTA-3′ (reverse). A β-actin cDNA fragment was amplified as an internal control using the following primers: 5′-CCACCATGTACCCAGGCATT-3′ (forward) and 5′-AGGGTGTAAAACGCAGCTCA-3′ (reverse).
Quantitative real-time RT–PCR analysisQuantitative real-time RT–PCR was performed using the StepOnePlus real-time PCR system (ThermoFisher, Carlsbad, CA, USA) with SuperReal PreMix Plus (SYBR Green; TIANGEN). Primers used in quantitative real-time RT–PCR are listed in Table 2. The relative quantity of target mRNA was determined using the ΔΔCt method, with Gapdh as the reference gene. All reactions were performed in triplicates.
RNA in situ hybridizationRNA ISH was performed as described previously (Ataca et al., 2016). Briefly, mouse brains were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin for 24 h at RT and paraffin-embedded following the standard methods. ISH was performed on 5-μm-thick sections using the RNAscope 2.5 HD Reagent Kit-RED (Advanced Cell Diagnostics, Hayward, CA). Adamts18 mRNA in mouse brains was detected by specific Adamts18 probe. The sections were also hybridized with probe against mouse peptidylprolyl isomerase B (PPIB) or bacterial dihydrodipicolinate reductase (DapB) as positive and negative control, respectively.
Hematoxylin and eosin (HE) stainingBrain tissues were fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin. After dewaxing and rehydration, HE staining was performed on 5-μm sections following the standard protocol.
Nissl stainingFor Nissl staining, 35-μm-thick frozen sections of mouse brains were prepared. The sections were immersed in Nissl staining solution (Beyotime Biotechnology, China) for 5 min, rinsed in distilled water twice for several seconds, and cleared in xylene twice for 10 min. Images were photographed with a microscope.
Immunofluorescence (IF) stainingFor IF, 5-μm-thick paraffin-embedded brain sections were deparaffinized, rehydrated, and processed by microwave heating in sodium citrate-EDTA antigen retrieval solution. After washing with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), sections were blocked with 3% BSA–PBS for 1 h and then incubated with an appropriate antibody such as anti-microtubule-associated protein 2 (MAP2) and antilaminin overnight at 4 °C, followed by goat anti-rabbit IgG fluorescent secondary antibody (1:200) (Jackson Immuno Research, Cat. No. 111-165-003) for 1 h at RT. Then sections were washed with PBS and counterstained with 4′, 6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) (MP Biomedicals, Cat. No.157574) 10 μg/ml in PBS. Finally, sections were mounted using antifade mounting medium (Beyotime Biotechnology, Cat. No. P0123) and images acquired by fluorescence microscope. An average of 12 sections was used to quantitate the IF intensity of MAP2 for each group. And there were at least 3 individual sex-matched mice in each group. Images were processed by being converted to gray scale after background subtraction in Image-Pro Plus 6.0 (IPP, MediaCybernetics, Inc., SilverSpring, MD, USA) software. The sum integrated optical density (IOD) and the sum areas were measured using IPP. Then mean fluorescence intensity was gained by dividing the sum area by the sum IOD.
Golgi stainingTo examine morphologies of neurons and dendritic spines, Golgi staining was performed using the FD Rapid Golgi Stain Kit (FD Neurotechnologies, Baltimore, MD, USA). Briefly, quickly removed mice brains were immersed in the impregnation solution prepared in advance at room temperature (RT) for 2 weeks in the dark. After that, mice brains were transferred to another impregnation solution at RT for at least 72 h in the dark. Sections of 120 μm thick were cut on a cryostat (CM1900, Leica, Germany) at −20 °C followed by Golgi staining and mounting on gelatin-coated glass slides. Images were taken using a light microscope (Leica, Germany).
Analysis of dendritic morphologyTo analyze dendritic morphologies of hippocampal dentate gyrus (DG) granule cells, measurements of total dendritic length and Sholl analysis of granule cells were performed using ImageJ 1.52d (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA; http://imagej.nih.gov/ij). Intact dendrites of granule cells were tracked by continuously adjusting the focal planes of the light microscope (Leica, Germany). A series of photographs of one neuron were composed by using the image sequence project of ImageJ followed by processing with the NeuronStudio software (version 0.9.92, Computational Neurobiology and Imaging Center, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA). Neurons were reconstructed by tracing with NeuronJ (a plugin of ImageJ), and the total dendritic lengths were automatically calculated by the software. Dendritic complexity was assessed by Sholl analysis (a plugin of ImageJ) on reconstructed neurons. 18 granule cells in DG were examined from each genotype group if the neurons were relatively isolated, easy to identify, and relatively intact with a complete dendritic tree.
Analysis of spine densitySpines on hippocampal DG granule cells were examined and imaged at 1000× magnification. Specific segments of spines on DG granule cells were reconstructed the same way as the analysis of dendritic morphology. The number of spines on a limited length of a dendrite was counted using the ImageJ software. At least three distal dendritic segments of at least 15 μm in length, were analyzed per granule cell, and 9 granule cells each from WT mice and Adamts18 KO littermates were examined.
Tail suspension test (TST)For TST, mice were suspended by their tails with lab tape above the ground, in such a position that they cannot escape or hold on to nearby surfaces. Then total time that a mouse stayed immobile was recorded during the 6-min test.
Forced swim test (FST)For FST, two clear glass cylinders (40 cm height × 20 cm diameter) were filled with water at room temperature (25 °C) to a height of 30 cm. A mouse was then placed in the water by holding its tail, and the time that the mouse stayed immobile before moving its head above the water was recorded by the software Any-maze during the 6-min test period.
Sucrose preference testMice were habituated to drinking water from two small bottles without any food restriction for the first 3 days. On the following 2 days, water in the two bottles was replaced by 1% (w/v) sucrose solution. The mice were single-housed and denied of water for 12 h. After that, each mouse was given one bottle of water and another bottle of 1% (w/v) sucrose solution in random order for 4 h. The total amount of water and 1% (w/v) sucrose solution consumed was regarded as the total intake, and sucrose preference (%) was expressed as the percentage of 1% (w/v) sucrose solution intake to the total intake.
Open-field test (OFT)OFT was carried out to measure locomotor activity, anxiety-like behavior, and exploratory behavior. Each mouse was placed at the center of a defined open field (26 cm × 26 cm × 26 cm) and allowed to move freely in it for 15 min. The locomotor activity as indicated by the distance and speed of movements was monitored and recorded by a computerized video-tracking system equipped with the software Any-maze.
Elevated O mazeElevated O maze was used to assess the anxiety level of mice. The apparatus has a circular platform (diameter 46 cm), which is elevated 46 cm above the floor. The circular platform is divided into 4 equal sectors of which two opposite sectors are double walled forming a channel between the two walls. The other 2 sectors, referred to as open sectors, are not walled. The test mouse was placed on one of the open sectors and allowed to freely explore for 5 min. The time that the mouse spent on open sectors was recorded by the software Any-maze (Stoelting, Wood Dale, IL, USA).
Light/dark transition testThe light/dark transition test was conducted to determine the anxiety level of mice. A cage (26 × 26 cm) was divided into two equal partitions (both 26 × 13 cm). One partition was brightly illuminated, and the other was dark. The test mouse was placed in the dark partition and allowed to freely explore the two partitions for 15 min. The time that the mouse spent in the light partition was recorded by the software Truscan 2.01.
Three chamber testThe three chamber test was performed to assess the sociability and social novelty of mice. The apparatus consists of a transparent acrylic box (60 × 40 cm) that is divided equally into three chambers (20 × 40 cm each). Each chamber has a door (8 × 6 cm). Two age-matched stranger mice (Stranger 1 and Stranger 2) that had no prior contact with the test mouse were habituated by placing them separately in the two lateral chambers for 25 min a day for 3 days prior to testing. On the test day, the test mouse was placed in the middle chamber and allowed to explore all three chambers for 10 min. The test mouse was then put back in the middle chamber and denied access to the other 2 chambers. Stranger 1 mouse was then placed in one of the two lateral chambers, and the test mouse was allowed to freely explore all three chambers for 10 min to become familiar with Stranger 1. For the social novelty test, Stranger 2 was introduced into the previously empty chamber, and the test mouse was allowed to explore all three chambers for 10 min. The time the test mouse spent in each chamber was recorded by the software Any-maze (Stoelting, Wood Dale, IL, USA).
Novel object recognitionNovel object recognition was used to evaluate the short-term memory of mice. Mice were habituated 5 min a day for 3 consecutive days in a box (29 × 29 × 25 cm). On the final day, the test mouse was placed in the box containing two identical objects (A and B) for 8 min. One hour later, one of the two identical objects was replaced by a novel object (object C), and the test mouse was permitted to explore the box for 5 min. Mice were supposed to interact more with the novel object. The objects were washed with 70% alcohol between tests.
Radial eight-arm maze (RAM) testRAM test was conducted to assess the spatial learning ability and working memory of mice. RAM consists of a central platform (diameter 25 cm) with eight radiating arms. Each arm is shielded with 15-cm-high walls and has a small plastic food cup at the end. The maze is positioned 1 m above ground, and a camera is placed above the maze. Mice were individually housed and restricted for food until their body weight was reduced to approximately 85% of the original body weight. During the first two days, mice were habituated 10 min a day for finding food on each arm. In the next three days, each mouse was individually trained to find food on the maze with only one arm containing food until 10 min or food was found. 2 trials were performed each day. On the test day, all arms were baited, and the time required for the mouse to find all baits and the number of arms each mouse visited were recorded. The test was terminated when all food baits were found or when 10 min had elapsed. Re-entry into the previously visited arms was considered an error. Error % (number of errors/number of arms each mouse visited) was used to assess the performance of mice in RAM.
Morris water maze (MWM) testThe MWM test was used to assess the spatial learning ability of mice. MWM consists of a circular pool that is filled half-way with water. A platform is placed somewhere in the pool with its top approximately one inch above water. A camera with tracking system is placed above the pool. The circular pool is equally divided into four quadrants by two lines. The ends of the lines demarcate four starting points (points 1, 2, 3, 4) on the pool rim for swimming. During the training phase, each mouse was given 4 swimming trials per day for 4 days with random starting points, and each trial was terminated when the mouse found the platform or 1 min had elapsed. If the mouse failed to find the platform within 1 min, it was guided to the platform and allowed to rest on it for ~30 s. On the 5th day (the test day), the platform was submerged in water, and the time required for the mouse to find the platform from each of the starting point was recorded.
Sandwich ELISA and Western blottingFor Sandwich ELISA, brain tissues were dissected from mice, weighted, and homogenized in 0.1 M PBS buffer (pH 7.4) containing protease inhibitor cocktail at 1 g/10 mL at 4 °C. After centrifugation at 12,000g for 10 min, laminin levels were measured, according to the manufacturer’s instructions of the ELISA kit (LYBD Bio-Technique Co, Ltd, Beijing, China). For Western blot, brain tissues were dissected from mice, weighted, and homogenized in RIPA buffer [50 mM Tris (pH7.4), 150 mM Nacl, 1% Triton X-100, 1% sodium deoxycholate, 0.1% SDS] (Boster Wuhan, China), with protease inhibitors and phosphatase inhibitors (Roche, Basel, Switzerland). The samples were centrifuged at 12,000 rpm for 15 min at 4 °C and tissue debris was removed. Protein concentration was determined by BCA assay reagent (Pierce, Rockford, IL, USA). Proteins were separated on a 12% SDS–PAGE under reducing conditions and then transferred onto a polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) membrane. The membrane was blocked in blocking buffer (PBS, 0.5% Tween-20, and 5% non-fat dry milk powder) and then incubated with primary antibody for 1 h at RT. After washing, the membrane was incubated with horseradish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibody for 1 h at RT. The immunoreactive bands were visualized with enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) Western blot kit (Millipore, Boston, MA, USA), and quantified using ImageJ version 1.50i.
Statistical analysisAll data are presented as mean ± SEM. Data were analyzed using two-tailed unpaired student’s t-test or analysis of variance (ANOVA). Kolmogorov–Smirnov’s test was used for the Sholl analysis of dendritic complexity. For RAM test, error% was analyzed using repeated measures of ANOVA to determine genotype effects on behavioral responses. For the MWM test, the learning curves (latency during the training phase) of mice were analyzed using repeated measures ANOVA. Differences were considered significant if P < 0.05.
RESULTS
Expression of Adamts18 mRNA in mouse brainTo clarify the potential roles of ADAMTS18 in CNS, we determined Adamts18 mRNA levels in mouse brains at different developmental stages. RT–PCR analyses showed that Adamts18 mRNA levels were very high in the brains of embryos (E18.5) and two-week-old mice, but were significantly decreased in adult (15 weeks) brains (Fig. 1A, B). In situ hybridization revealed that Adamts18 mRNAs were present in most areas of the brain of two-week-old mice, especially in the granular cell layer of cerebellum and the hippocampus DG granular cell layer (Fig. 1C, D); however, the abundance of Adamts18 mRNAs was dramatically decreased in the corresponding areas of adult brains (Fig. 1D).
ADAMTS18 deficiency has little effect on gross anatomy of the brainThe gross anatomy of the brain was then examined, and no apparent abnormalities were found in the brains of Adamts18 KO mice and their WT littermates (Fig. 2A). Nissl staining revealed no gross structure alterations in the whole brain (Fig. 2B) and the six neural cell layers (Fig. 2C) in the cerebral cortex of Adamts18 KO mice. The numbers of hematoxylin-positive cells in cerebral cortex, hippocampus, and cerebellum in Adamts18 KO mice were similar to those in WT mice (Fig. 2D, E).
ADAMTS18 deficiency leads to alteration in dendritic structural plasticity in DG granule cellsWe further determined the numbers of dendrites and axons in adult mouse brain sections. IF staining showed that the MAP2 (a dendrite marker) mean intensity was higher in Adamts18 KO mice than in WT mice (1.723 ± 0.07734 vs. 1.425 ± 0.002959, *P < 0.05) (Fig. 3A, B), indicating that there was a higher density of DG dendrites in Adamts18 KO mice. However, there were no significant difference in axon numbers, determined by anti-Tau-1 (an axon marker) staining, between Adamts18 KO mice and their WT littermates (data not shown). Golgi staining of brain sections was then performed to examine morphological alterations in DG granule cells. Increased numbers of stained granule cells with more neurites were consistently observed in Adamts18 KO mice compared with WT mice (Fig. 3C). Furthermore, a marked increase in average total dendritic length (1110 ± 91.02 μm vs. 870.3 ± 65.64 μm, *P < 0.05) (Fig. 3D) of DG granule cells was seen in Adamts18 KO mice. Sholl analysis of reconstructed dendrites (Fig. 3E) revealed that dendritic arborization (or dendritic branching) was increased in Adamts18 KO mice compared to WT mice (Fig. 3F). The number of dendritic spines on DG granule cells was also significantly increased in Adamts18 KO mice compared with WT mice (9.919 ± 0.285 per 10 μm vs. 8.811 ± 0.372 per 10 μm, *P < 0.05) (Fig. 3G–I). Since the postsynaptic density 95 (PSD-95) is a key protein that maintains spine stability (Ehrlich et al., 2007; Lambert et al., 2017), its level in hippocampus was determined by Western blotting. Results showed that the levels of PSD-95 were significantly higher in Adamts18 KO mice than in WT mice (Fig. 3J, K). These results suggest a role of ADAMTS18 in the maintenance of dendritic structural plasticity of DG granule cells.
ADAMTS18 deficiency reduces depression-like behaviors in miceA battery of behavioral tests was then performed (Table 3). In the OFT, Adamts18 KO mice traveled a longer distance (3589 ± 192.6 cm vs. 3019 ± 176.7 cm) than their WT littermates (*P < 0.05) (Fig. 4A), suggesting that Adamts18 KO mice have higher levels of spontaneous activities than WT mice. The central distance over the total distance (39 ± 1.5% vs. 32 ± 1.7%), time spent in the central area (46 ± 2.1 % vs. 37 ± 2.5%), and entries to the center area (126 ± 8.7 times vs. 102 ± 6.1 times) were all significantly increased in Adamts18 KO mice compared to their WT littermates (Fig. 4B–D), suggesting that Adamts18 KO mice had lower anxiety levels than their WT littermates. In the TST, Adamts18 KO mice had a decreased immobility time compared with their WT littermates (201 ± 14.9 vs. 242 ± 7.3 s, *P < 0.05) (Fig. 4E). In the FST, the immobility time was significantly reduced in Adamts18 KO mice (66 ± 8.4 vs. 93 ± 8.6 s, *P < 0.05) (Fig. 4F), suggesting Adamts18 KO mice have significantly reduced levels of depression-like reactions. To exclude the influence of hyperactivity of KO mice, we performed sucrose preference test, which is a classic method for investigating anhedonia of mice. Adamts18 KO mice were found to have higher sucrose preference (%) than their WT littermates (68 ± 3.1 vs. 57 ± 2.8, *P < 0.05) (Fig. 4G).
ADAMTS18 deficiency leads to activation of the laminin/PI3K/AKT/GSK-3β/CRMP2 signaling pathway in embryonic brainWe previously showed that ADAMTS18 deficiency influences the early adipocyte directional differentiation associated with increased laminin expression (Zhu et al., 2018). As laminin is also crucial for neuronal polarity (Esch et al., 1999; Menager et al., 2004), we wonder whether Adamts18 deficiency affects the neurite morphologies in association with laminin. IHC (Fig. 5A) was first performed to examine the distribution of laminin in the brain; results showed that laminin levels were significantly increased in embryonic brains (E14.5) of Adamts18 KO mice compared to their WT littermates. Sandwich ELISA of brain tissue (Fig. 5B) showed that Adamts18 KO brain had a higher amount of laminin than the WT (458.4 ± 27.1 ng/mg vs. 402 ± 39.9 ng/mg). qRT-PCR was then performed to measure mRNA levels of various laminin subunits including lamininα1, 3, 5, β1, and γ1. Results showed that the mRNA levels of lamininα5/β1 were significantly increased in embryonic brain of Adamts18 KO mice compared to those of their WT littermates (Fig. 5C, D). No significant difference was observed for other laminin subunits (such as lamininα3, 5, and γ1) between WT and Adamts18 KO mice (Data not shown). The role of the laminin-mediated phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3-kinase)/Akt/glycogen synthasekinase-3β (GSK-3β)/collapsin response mediator protein-2 (PI3K/AKT/GSK-3β/CRMP2) signaling pathway in the regulation of neuron polarization was then investigated (Inagaki et al., 2001; Yoshimura et al., 2005). Although non-phosphorylated forms of these proteins showed no significant differences in embryonic brain, protein levels of phospho-PI3K (Tyr458), phospho-AKT (Ser473), and phosphor-GSK-3β (Ser9) were significantly increased and those of phosphorylated CRMP2 (Thr514) were decreased in embryonic brains of Adamts18 KO mice compared to their WT controls (Fig. 5E, F). These results suggest that ADAMTS18 deficiency leads to activation of the laminin/PI3K/AKT/GSK-3β/CRMP2 signaling pathway in embryonic brains (Fig. 5G).
ADAMTS18 deficiency alters the transcription levels of other ADAMTS genes in embryonic brainsSince some ADAMTSs (e.g. ADAMTS-1, 4, 5, and 9) have been reported to be involved in neurite outgrowth and synaptic plasticity (Lemarchant et al., 2013; Gottschall and Howell, 2015), the possibility that Adamts18 deletion affects the expression of other ADAMTS family members was determined. qRT-PCR was performed to measure the amounts of Adamts1, 3, 4, 5, 9, 16 mRNA (Fig. 6A–F), and only the levels of Adamts1 mRNA was found to be significantly increased in the brain of Adamts18 KO mice (Fig. 6A). These data suggest that Adamts18 deletion could affect the expression of other Adamts genes; this may be a compensatory effect for Adamts18 deletion.
DISCUSSION
In this study, we investigated the cellular and behavioral phenotypes of Adamts18 KO mice. Our study demonstrates that ADAMTS18 plays a critical role in neuronal morphogenesis and control of emotional reactions in mice.
Adamts18 was found to be highly expressed in the hippocampus DG granular cell layer of developing (embryonic) brains (Fig. 1D), suggesting that ADAMTS18 plays an important role in the development of neurons in this region. This possibility was corroborated by the observation that Adamts18 KO mice displayed higher dendritic branching complexity and spine density on hippocampal DG granular cells (Fig. 3). Our data also showed that ADAMTS18 deficiency leads to increased laminin expression in embryonic mouse brains (Fig. 5). Laminin is a major ECM component of the basal lamina (Tunggal et al., 2000); it induces rapid production of phosphatidylinositol 3, 4, 5-triphosphate (PIP3) at the tip of a neurite through the action of PI3-kinase (Esch et al., 1999; Menager et al., 2004). PIP3 then activates Akt by phosphorylation at Thr-308/Ser-473; activated Akt phosphorylates GSK-3β at Ser-9 and inactivates its kinase activity. Inactivated GSK-3β (phosphorylated form) loses its ability to phosphorylate CRMP2 at Thr-514/Ser-518, leading to increased levels of nonphosphorylate CRMP2 (activated CRMP2). CRMP2 is mainly located in axon, dendrite, growth cone, and neuronal cell body. In embryo, it regulates neurite growth. Many studies have shown that the increase in activated CRMP2 induces multiple neurite formations (Inagaki et al., 2001; Yoshimura et al., 2005). In line with this view, our data demonstrated that this signaling pathway was markedly enhanced in the embryonic brain of Adamts18 KO mice (Fig. 5E–G), suggesting activated laminin/PI3K/AKT/GS K-3β/CRMP2 signaling pathway is one of the possibilities to induce increased dendritic branching complexity as observed in Adamts18 KO mice (Fig. 3). In addition, the upregulation in the expression of laminin subunit Lama5 in embryonic brain of Adamts18 KO mice (Fig. 5C) could contribute to this phenomenon. It has been shown that Lama5 mRNA is highly abundant in the hippocampal DG (Omar et al., 2017) and is largely overlapped with Adamts18. As laminin α5 is a stabilizer of dendritic spines and synapses (Omar et al., 2017), it is possible that ADAMTS18 modulates dendritic spine stability by regulating the production of laminin α5. The expression of PSD-95 protein was also significantly increased in Adamts18 KO mice (Fig. 3J, K). PSD-95 has also been shown to play a vital role in maintaining spine stability. Therefore, it is likely that ADAMTS18 affects spine stability partly through regulating the expression of laminin α5 and PSD-95 in granule cells.
At the molecular level, ADAMTS18 may also cleave ECM components or regulates other signaling pathways. Several studies have reported that some ADAMTS family members are involved in embryonic brain development by degrading the ECM. ADAMTS3 is expressed in the excitatory neurons of the embryonic and postnatal cerebral cortex and hippocampus. Ogino et al. (2017) reported that ADAMTS3 inactivates Reelin in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus by cleaving it at Reelin repeat 3 (N-t site). Reelin is a secreted glycoprotein and is essential for embryonic brain development and adult brain functions. Conditional KO mice, in which ADAMTS3 is deficient only in the excitatory neurons of the forebrain, show increased dendritic branching and elongation in the postnatal cerebral cortex (Ogino et al., 2017). ADAMTS4 (Hisanaga et al., 2012) and ADAMTS5 (Krstic et al., 2012) also mediate N-t cleavage, but whether they cleave Reelin in vivo has not been investigated. In this study, we detected the association of ADAMTS18 with other ADAMTSs (ADAMTS1, 3, 4, 5, 9, and 16) in embryonic stage (Fig. 6). Only the levels of Adamts1 mRNA were found to be significantly increased in the brain of Adamts18 KO mice. ADAMTS1 has been found to be expressed in the mouse and rat brain during development (Thai and Iruela-Arispe, 2002; Gunther et al., 2005). ADAMTS1 expression is closely associated with an increase in the ADAMTS-specific N-terminal cleavage fragment of brevican (Yuan et al., 2002). We therefore hypothesize that ADAMTS18 can affect mouse phenotypes through degrading some important ligands or extracellular matrices. Further study will clarify the role of ADAMTS18 in this aspect.
The elaborate structure of the dendritic arbor is a hallmark of neurons. It is a major defining factor of how input information is integrated and how synaptic plasticity is maintained (Hausser et al., 2000; Jan and Jan, 2010). Changes in dendritic structure have been observed in multiple psychiatric disorders, including depression (Qiao et al., 2016). Hippocampus is the most well-studied brain region in depression research because it is part of the limbic system with nerve fiber connecting emotion-related brain regions including the prefrontal cortex and amygdala. It has been shown that changes in hippocampal dendritic structure, such as dendritic branching complexity and spine density, are closely related to depression (Qiao et al., 2016). In this study, we found that Adamts18 KO mice showed reduced levels of depression-like reactions (Fig. 4E–G). This could be attributed in part to increased dendritic branching complexity and spine density of hippocampal DG granular cells in Adamts18 KO mice. In future studies, we will further evaluate the reduction in depression-like behaviors in Adamts18 KO mice using several chronic stress models, such as chronic restraint stress (CRS), chronic unpredictable mild stress (CUMS), and chronic social defeat stress (CSDS).
ADAMTS18 was previously linked to white matter integrity in healthy 72- to 74-year-old people by a genome-wide association study (Lopez et al., 2012). In this study, we examined the gross anatomy of the brains of Adamts18 KO mice using Nissl staining and H&E staining (Fig. 2) and no abnormalities in the white matter. This finding is contradictory to those of previously reported. We attribute this discrepancy to age difference. More studies are needed to find out the changes in the white matter of older Adamts18 KO mice. In summary, our findings indicate that ADAMTS18 plays an important role in neuronal morphogenesis and emotional control in CNS. Since the regulation of brain development is a complex process and involves a large number of molecules, further studies are required to identify ADAMTS18′s substrates, intermolecular interactions, or other signaling networks.
