Substance use and misuse is common among adolescents; a nationally representative survey found that 49 percent of 12th graders reported lifetime use of any illicit drug and about 30 percent used illicit substances in the previous year (Johnston, O’Malley, Miech, Bachman, & Schulenberg, 2015). Some youth, including those who are in housing crisis, runaway, economically disadvantaged, physically or mentally challenged, or school dropouts have higher rates of substance use and substance use disorder than their peers (Catalano, Haggerty, Gainey, Hoppe, & Brewer, 1998; Hawkins, Catalano, & Miller, 1992; Lorion, Bussell, & Goldberg, 1991). Substance abuse prevention efforts targeting marginalized youth need identify meaningful strength based strategies to reduce the likelihood of substance misuse (Catalano et al., 1998).
Hope—an individual’s belief that they will meet their goals and aspirations—is one psychological construct thought to be associated with motivation and self-regulation (Snyder, Irving, & Anderson, 1991). The growing literature on the effectiveness of motivational interviewing, a counseling technique enhancing internal motivation, on adolescent substance use illustrates this, suggesting that motivation and high future expectations may be interrelated (Barnett et al., 2013; Miller & Rollnick, 2002). Studies among adolescents have shown that hope is associated with less HIV sexual risk behaviors, less teen violence, and better decision-making (Schmid, Phelps, & Lerner, 2011; Snyder et al., 1991; Stoddard, McMorris, & Sieving, 2011; Stoddard, Zimmerman, & Bauermeister, 2011; Tolou-Shams, Brown, Houck, & Lescano, 2008). Hope has also been described in relation to goal driven behaviors, optimism, and in models of future orientation (Beal, 2011; Johnson, Blum, & Cheng, 2014).
Given that hopefulness can be modified and is associated with decreased likelihood of risk behavior among adolescents we sought to explore the relationship between hopefulness and substance use (i.e. heavy episodic alcohol misuse, daily tobacco use, marijuana or other illicit substance use, sexual activity with substance use) in a sample of marginalized youth.
Methods
A convenience sample of English speaking youth ages 14 to 19 were recruited using flyers given to community agency staff and onsite recruitment at a pre-determined time, between August and December 2014 from local youth serving agencies. These included foster care agencies, residential treatment facilities, detention centers, and homeless youth shelters as part of a county-wide effort to collect adolescent health data. Youth in the detention center did not receive an incentive. Community youth received $20.00 to thank them for their time.
Anonymous, one-time surveys were completed on a laptop via audio-computer assisted self-interview (ACASI) technology and headphones (to address low literacy and privacy). Each participant was assigned an anonymous identification number and no identifiable information was collected. Study procedures and the current secondary analyses were approved by the University of Pittsburgh IRB.
Hope variableHopefulness was assessed via previously validated questions including “I am excited about my future”, “I expect good things to happen to me”, and “I trust my future will turn out well” (Lippman et al., 2014). Participants answered on an ascending 5 point Likert scale with 5 being most affirmative (Coefficient alpha = 0.81). We summed the three questions to create a Hope Score (HS) that ranged from 3 (low hopefulness) to 15 (high hopefulness) (Lippman et al., 2014), which was dichotomized as low versus moderate-to-high. Moderate-to-High HS was a score of 10 and above based on a cut off of the 25th percentile. Additionally, the sample distribution of scores appeared to clearly break between 9 and below, and 10 and above. A sensitivity analysis using the HS as a continuous variable found similar results.
Substance use behaviorsQuestions related to substance use were from the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) Youth Risk Behavior Surveillance System (YRBSS) (Brener et al., 2013). We dichotomized outcomes of everyday tobacco use, last 30-day and lifetime marijuana use, heavy episodic drinking (6 or more at once in lifetime), sexual intercourse with substance use, and a composite hard drug measure that collapsed several specific illicit drugs including cocaine, prescription pills, hallucinogens etc. Table 1 further specifies outcome measures.
Statistical analysisParticipants who did not complete all three questions about hope were dropped (n = 6), yielding an analytic sample of 256. We examined the distributions of variables to ensure they were not abnormally skewed, and we confirmed the equivalence of variances across the two hope groups. In order to examine the magnitude of the bivariate associations between hope and each of the substance use variables, we estimated simple logistic regression models. Next, we identified and included covariates that had significant relationships (p < .05) with both the outcome and predictor variables. We then estimated multivariable logistic regression models to assess the relationship between hope and each of the substance use behavior outcomes, controlling for covariates. All analyses were conducted using Stata 13.1.
Results
The sample was evenly distributed by age, and was almost 60% male. Two thirds of the sample was Non-Hispanic African-American. The study sample had substantial housing instability, with almost half (41%) reporting any past year homelessness.
Those reporting low hope were more likely to be male (68%), more likely to endorse past year homelessness (60%), and more likely to be Non-Hispanic Black (53%) than those reporting moderate-to-high HS (Table 2).
Many of the youth in our sample endorsed substance use; 63% ever used marijuana, 40% youth reported marijuana use in last 30 days, 24% reported ever using hard drugs, 51% reported daily tobacco use, and 25% reported heavy episodic alcohol use.
Higher HS were associated with lower likelihood of participating in substance using behaviors (Table 3). Those with higher HS were less likely to endorse heavy episodic drinking, daily tobacco use, recent or lifetime marijuana use, and having sex after using substances (p = <.05).
Those with higher HS continued to have a 52% decreased odds of lifetime marijuana use with adjustments for appropriate covariates (AOR 0.48, p = .050) (included age, depression symptoms, and homelessness). Youth who had high hope were also marginally less likely to have sex after substance use (AOR 0.481, p = .065). None of the other substance use behaviors remained associated with higher HS in these adjusted models (Table 3).
Discussion
In this sample of marginalized youth, we found associations between higher HS and lower likelihood of endorsing substance use and misuse, specifically heavy alcohol use, daily tobacco use, recent and lifetime marijuana use, and substance use with intercourse. In models adjusting for covariates, less lifetime marijuana use remained significantly associated with higher HS.
To our knowledge, no studies have examined hopefulness and substance use behaviors among high-school age marginalized youth. Like Wilson et al., who found an association between hopefulness and alcohol, tobacco, and drug use in a group of at risk middle school students, we also found that hope is associated with decreased likelihood for substance use for high-school aged marginalized youth (Wilson, Syme, Boyce, Battistich, & Selvin, 2005). Many of the youth in our study sample are in risk situations associated with continued substance abuse (Galea, Nandi, & Vlahov, 2004) including housing instability, juvenile correction system involvement, and socioeconomic hardships. Even for this population at high risk for engaging in substance use, higher hopefulness appears to be associated with greater likelihood of never using marijuana.
Our point estimates show substantially decreased odds of endorsing substance-using behaviors in the higher hope group in both bivariate and multivariate analyses. The association diminishes below significance after controlling for demographics, suggesting a more complex relationship between hopefulness and the onset of substance use. It is possible that the sample size was too small to detect significant associations. It is also possible that the covariates such as age moderate the association between hopefulness and substance use behaviors. This study encourages further research into the role of hope in high-risk youth.
In this cross-sectional study, we cannot determine directionality between hopefulness and substance using behavior. No large studies have directly assessed hopefulness and substance abuse over time in adolescents that would help elucidate the directionality of this association. One study supporting the possible protective role of hope comes from Donovan et al. (2015), whose small longitudinal prevention study found that high hope/optimism is associated with decreased likelihood of both initiating and continuing substance use in a group of Native American youth. Though limited by sample size, the results are compelling.
Substance use may also decrease an individual’s hopefulness. If so, addressing hopefulness in drug prevention interventions would be important for secondary prevention. Hope is described as a central element of successful treatment related to behavior change (Glassman, Kottsieper, Zuckoff, & Gosch, 2013; Koehn, O’Neill, & Sherry, 2012; Larsen & Stege, 2010a, 2010b). Regardless of directionality, addressing hope may increase intervention efficacy whether the youth has already initiated substance use or is at risk of significant use.
There are limitations to consider with this exploratory study. The study was not powered to assess these associations and the lack of statistical significance may reflect the relatively small sample size. However, a trend towards decreased odds for substance misuse with higher hope remains. Convenience sampling limits generalizability. Recall and social desirability bias are known limitations of self-report surveys. The privacy methods used were intended to reduce the impact of such bias.
The National Institute on Drug Abuse (2002) emphasizes the importance of risk and protective factors in prevention of drug use in youth. Future studies with a larger sample should further explore hope as a possible protective factor, particularly in youth from a variety of socioeconomic backgrounds, cultures, and environments. This study adds to literature on the relationship between hope and substance use in older youth, with higher hope being associated with lower likelihood of substance use. Strategies to increase hopefulness may add to interventions for marginalized youth that applies regardless of whether they target youth experimenting with substance use or those not yet exposed.
