Introduction
Sickle cell disease (SCD) is a common genetic blood disorder predominantly affecting African-Americans in the United States (US). [1] The disease is associated with significant complications such as acute pain crisis, stroke, acute chest syndrome, embolism and priapism, which lead to frequent emergency department (ED) visits and hospitalizations.[2, 3] The most common reason for an ED visit is management of vaso-occlusive episodes (VOE) which require parenteral opioids. High ED utilization has been associated with younger versus older age and fewer ambulatory visits.[4, 5] Additionally, rates of 14 and 30-day ED return visits by SCD patients are high, which may indicate a lack of access to outpatient care or serve as an indicator of poor quality ED care.[6, 7]
The estimated number of annual ED visits in the US by patients with a diagnosis of SCD ranges from 197, 000 – 230,000.[8, 9] ED utilization contributes to the high cost of SCD care. ED utilization and charges are higher for SCD patients when compared to other chronic diseases such as congestive heart failure and asthma.[8] In 2006, the total charges for all SCD ED visits in the U.S. were estimated at $356 million, the most common reason for ED visit was due to pain.[8, 9] Despite the high costs of care, several studies have found poor quality pain management and disparities in the care of SCD patients in the ED.[10, 11] A common complaint by SCD patients is that they are suspected or unjustly accused of drug dependency and drug seeking.[12] SCD patients experienced longer delays to initial analgesic administration, such as renal colic patients, despite having higher pain scores and triage acuity levels.[13] Differences in the time to receive pain medications have been found to vary by patient characteristics such as age, race and gender and organizational characteristics such as ED volume and arrival time.[13–16] Negative attitudes by ED healthcare providers towards SCD patients have been associated with a lack of adherence to pain management guidelines.[10, 11, 17] The National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute (NHLBI) published evidence based guidelines for the management of SCD in 2014.[18] The guidelines include 17 recommendations for the treatment of VOE, including starting analgesic management within 30 minutes of triage in the ED, or 60 minutes of arrival in the ED.[18] However, decreased provider knowledge about SCD and variations in analgesic medication prescribing practices may be barriers to successful implementation of the NHLBI guidelines. [19–21]
In order to improve SCD care provision, the NHLBI funded eight centers across the US to participate in the Sickle Cell Disease Implementation Consortium (SCDIC, U01HL133964). This is a six-year endeavor that consists of two phases. Phase one entailed conducting needs assessments and identifying barriers to care. The aim of this paper is to describe the SCD patients’ perceived barriers and facilitators to care provision in one of the centers in the consortium. The findings were used to inform phase two of the consortium’s effort, which involves developing interventions to improve ED management of SCD and adherence to the NHLBI guidelines on SCD care. [22]
Methods
Study Design and SettingA multi-methods study using a combination of surveys, focus groups and in-depth interviews was conducted. The study took place in a large comprehensive Sickle Cell center in North Carolina (NC). The study site serves over 500 adults and approximately 150 adolescents with SCD. Several programs have been implemented over a period of years, to address SCD patient concerns. Resources include an SCD nurse champion program consisting of nurses with training in the care of SCD that attend periodic update meetings, provide expertise and education to other nurses. [23] In the ED there are SCD pain management protocols allowing subcutaneous analgesic doses while in the waiting room, a sickle cell disease education website for ED providers an individual pain plans are available through electronic health records. [23, 24] Institutional Review Board approval was obtained prior to data collection. Participants provided written informed consent prior to participation.
SampleParticipants were eligible to participate in the study if they were between the ages of 15–45 and had a diagnosis of SCD with genotypes SS, SC, SB0 or SB+. Fourteen participants completed an interview or focus groups and 51 completed surveys.
Data CollectionSurveys -The survey included 20 questions that assess the frequency of acute pain episodes and patient perspectives of quality of care. Five questions from the Cooperative Study of Sickle Cell Disease form 25 captured the number of painful episodes that required visits to the ED or hospital. [25] There were 27 questions from the Adult Sickle Cell Quality of Life Measurement Information System (ASCQ-Me) quality of care module included. The ASCQ-Me measures patient reported utilization and perceptions about quality of care for individuals treated for SCD. [26–28] ASCQ-Me is composed of three composites: 1) access to care, 2) quality of provider communication and 3) quality of care in the ED. [26] The ASCQ-Me uses branching questions, so that participants that answered “Yes” to certain questions are then provided with additional related questions, the sample for those questions may vary from the total sample completing the survey. Reported ASCQ-Me reliability scores are Cronbach α 0.70–0.83 and construct validity scores of r =0.32–0.83 correlations with global care ratings. [26] All survey questions were obtained from the SCD collection of measures in the PhenX Toolkit. [25] The toolkit was developed to promote data comparability across SCD research by providing common core measures important to understand SCD. [25] The surveys were administered by study coordinators and were completed electronically. Each survey took approximately 45 minutes to complete.Focus Groups & Semi-Structured Interviews- The study principal investigators conducted in-depth interviews and focus groups with participants from May to August 2017. Each interview lasted approximately 60 minutes, was digitally recorded and transcribed verbatim. We utilized a semi-structured guide developed by members of the SCDIC needs assessment committee. The questions were informed by current literature on SCD and expert knowledge with representation from all eight centers participating in the consortium. The guide explored reasons for ED visits, perception of care received in the ED and ability to establish follow-up after the visit.
Data analysisSurvey data were entered electronically using Research Electronic Data Capture (REDCap). Descriptive statistics expressed as frequencies, means, and standard deviations were obtained using SAS (version 9.4) and QSR NVivo (version 11) was used to code and analyze qualitative data. A codebook was developed based on emerging themes from the transcripts and a priori codes adapted from literature on SCD. Three members of the research team (E.B., N.C., R.V.M.) independently coded 10% of the interview transcripts. Differences in coding were discussed repeatedly until consensus was reached. A weighted kappa value of 0.95 was achieved. The remainder of the transcripts were coded using the final agreed upon coding structure.
Results
SurveysDemographics-Fifty-one participants completed the survey. (Table 1) Most participants had SS or S Beta 0 Thalassemia SCD phenotype (78%) and were 30.67 years of age, 92% were non-Hispanic Black, 45.6% had some college or associates degree education, 35% were disabled and 70% were never married (Table 1).Pain Episodes-In the 6-months prior to the survey, 80% reported having severe pain episodes that kept them from their usual daily activities but were not seen by a doctor or nurse. (Table 2) Two-thirds visited the ED because of sickle cell pain, 22% visited the ED ≥ 4 times because of an SCD painful event (Table 2).Perceived Quality of Care-Twelve months prior to the survey 68% went to an ED for SCD care they needed right away (Table 3). The majority (86%) of these participants have a doctor/nurse that they usually see when they need healthcare (Table 3). Of the 42 participants that had an appointment with a doctor or nurse, 97.5% reported being treated with courtesy and respect, 92.5% reported that they spent enough time with them, and 90% reported the doctor/nurse knows how sickle cell affects them personally (Table 3). Ninety percent of the 46 participants had a pain attack 12 months prior to the survey and 86% of them managed it at home without going to a doctor, clinic or hospital (Table 3). Sixty percent of participants with pain attack “very much” or “quite a bit” avoided going to the ED for care because of prior bad experiences (Table 3). Twelve months prior to the survey, 64.7% “never” or “sometimes” received immediate care when they wanted it in the ED, 52.9% were “usually” or “always” satisfied with care they received in the ED, but 71.7% avoided care in the ED when they needed it (Table 3). Fifty percent of participants waited 120 minutes or more in the ED for treatment of their sickle cell pain (Table 3). Participants reported that 51.5% of doctors and 54.6% of nurses treating them in the ED seemed to care about them, but 92.5% reported they had spent enough time with them (Table 3). Almost a third (31.6%) reported that ED doctors and nurses “not at all” or “a little bit” believed they had very bad SCD pain and 44.7% reported that ED doctors and nurses helped “somewhat,” “a little bit” or “not at all” with their pain during ED visits (Table 3).Focus Group and Interviews-A total of 14 participants completed an interview (n=10) or 2 focus groups (n=2 per focus group). Five major themes emerged, prioritized by the frequency of being mentioned: 1) ED is the last resort, 2) treatment delays, 3) inadequate discharge and follow-up, 4) drug seeking, stigma and disbelief and 5) ED provider knowledge gaps. Patient exemplars for each theme are provided as well as a table of patient recommendations for care (Table 4).
ED is the Last ResortAll participants reported pain as the primary reason for going to the ED. One participant also noted they go to the ED for treatment of his priapism. Nearly all participants described using the ED as a means of last resort for very severe pain relief that could not be controlled at home despite various pain coping strategies. Even in the case of priapism, the participant stated they first attempt to manage their priapism at home with exercise. Participants also identified the ED environment as a barrier, reporting that it is “not conducive” to their comfort, with “cold benches.”When I get to the emergency department, I’m at a 10. It’s rare that I show up at the emergency department and I’m at a 5. A 5 for me, I’m like okay you know now maybe it’s time for me to take some medicine. That’s my 5. So in order for us to come to the ER, it is literally the last alternative. We have tried everything in our magic box and it hasn’t worked and that’s why we’re here because the whole area is not conducive to you and being comfortable.
Treatment DelaysDelays in treatment initiation and assessment were a prominent concern in the interviews. One participant mentioned staying in the ED for close to six hours without treatment. ED providers were usually in a “rush” and “provided so many instructions” that the participants couldn’t comprehend. Another concern was the lack of a treatment protocol and a high turnover of providers.Iťs sometimes I wait, I’d have to go to like two or three hospitals just to get help, at that point and time, because some people they just say like you in sickle cell crisis and you already like hurting and stuff and like just say like they aren’t supposed to move just because you’re hurting real bad but still though they donť help you
Inadequate Discharge and Follow-UpWhen discharged home from the ED, the majority of participants reported lack of outpatient prescriptions for pain medication such as opioids. Others stated they left the ED without the healthcare providers scheduling follow up appointments with their primary care provider (PCP) or hematologist. ED providers left the onus of scheduling follow up appointments to the participants. One participant mentioned being discharged in the middle of the night without any transportation and his challenges getting home.For me it’s I may be told to follow up with the sickle cell team you know once I leave but outside of that there is no follow up, not that I’ve experienced. Coming out of the hospital, on that side [in-patient] there’s been follow up as far as scheduling your next Sickle Cell appointment and things like that and I think that might be something that you know should be added from the ER side is that you know once we have you know an episode and we report to the ED and we’re being treated then I mean I think maybe that you know that option should be considered to go ahead and schedule an appointment with the sickle cell team.
Drug Seeking, Stigma and DisbeliefParticipants reported they felt stigmatized in the ED, stating healthcare providers did not “take them seriously” and referred to them as drug addicts or drug seekers. This stigma often caused disbelief of the level of pain the participants reported and led to inadequate pain control.I have had visits in the hospital you know with the stigma that to me seems a little, a little racist, you know, because of the fact that they you know like a white nurse or something, somebody who’s not that familiar with the disease, they’ll see me coming in and like at 3:30 in the morning and like you kind of disheveled and or either you know, not even disheveled just coming in and say you’re in pain and you want medicine and they’ll treat you kinda funnyI have had experiences in the past where because of the fact that like I said to you earlier, the stigma thaťs placed on sickle cell patients of being drug addicts and drug seekers because you know the kind of pain we have and the strong medicines we have to take, you know, yeah some people have gotten addicted but the stigma placed on it we’re just drug addicts. We just want, you know, that narcotic to get high
ED Provider SCD Knowledge gapsParticipants identified lack of provider SCD knowledge as a barrier to pain relief in the ED. One participant described that this was an issue even in EDs with access to sickle cell providers.If you get people in a department that have experience with sickle cell patients and they learn or have knowledge about sickle cell disease they’re not in there long enough to teach the other people that are coming in and you have people that come in that I guess maybe just don’t even care to know much about sickle cell disease but you encounter healthcare professionals that have no clue about sickle cell disease and especially at this facility you have a Sickle Cell Clinic here and you can refer to doctors that have that expertise and they won’t even do that because the ideology is I’m a doctor, I know how to treat you.
DiscussionIn this multi-methods study, patients reported a high burden of pain, moderate ED use, and high avoidance of the ED for many pain episodes; 86% of the sample surveyed also reported managing a pain attack at home without seeking healthcare in the last year. Our sample far exceeded the frequency of managing painful episodes at home when compared to the study by Smith et al in which patients reported managing a crisis at home an average of 21.6% of mean pain days/person. [29] This is contrary to what many healthcare providers believe and should help dispel the myth that all patients with SCD manage all their pain by seeking treatment in the ED. Low use of the ED is also supported by data from Brousseau that reported individuals with SCD had an average of 2.59 encounters (hospitalization or ED visit treat and release) per year. [6] This data represented over eight states and 20,000 individuals with SCD. [6] The implications of these findings are important to ED and critical care nurses. Often patients wait far too long to seek care for VOE, or avoid seeking treatment at all, which makes treating pain more difficult. Rapid, proactive pain control provides the best chance of resolving a VOE. Nurses have the opportunity to encourage patients to seek care earlier for management of VOE if pain cannot be managed at home.Perception of ED care provided was moderate with 53% reporting being either “always” or “usually” satisfied with their ED care in the previous 12 months. Patients seemed most dissatisfied with the timeliness of receiving ED care; 50% of the sample reported waiting two hours or more for care. Delays were also discussed during the interviews with one participant reporting an over six-hour delay to treatment during an ED visit. This supports previous research that has found long delays from arrival in the ED to receipt of analgesics. [23] In another quality improvement study of three ED’s, delays were between one to two hours, however a third site experienced significantly longer delays of up to four hours. [30] NHLBI guidelines for the treatment of VOE recommend administration of analgesics within 60 minutes of arrival to the ED. [31] Valuable lessons in previous work to implement recommendations for improving timely treatment of VOE have been learned. [23] Difficult intravenous access is common among some patients with SCD and this often results in delays to administration of analgesics. The NHLBI expert panel recommends us of the sub-cutaneous dose for the initial analgesic dose if access is difficult. [31] Another barrier noted in the quality improvement study that can contribute to delays, was the lack of time for nursing education about the guidelines. [23] As hospitals have less and less time to allow for education, online education should be made available and required; these educational resources exist (sickleemergency.duke.edu) and have been externally reviewed and validated. [24] Overcrowding also contributes to longer delays to analgesia and remains a challenge to the administration of timely analgesics. [32] While challenging, ED’s can form a multidisciplinary team to determine other “spaces” that can be used to initiate treatment in the ED. Finally, under-triage is an important barrier to timely analgesic administration, especially in an over-crowded ED. Individuals with severe pain for a VOE meet the Emergency Severity Index (ESI) Level 2 criteria. [18, 33] Frequently patients with SCD are under-triaged and receive a score associated with a lower priority, ESI Level 3, which has been found to contribute to longer delays to provision of analgesia. [34] It is critical that ED nurses understand the critical nature of a patient presenting with VOE and the importance of assigning the correct triage level, ESI 2. In an already crowded ED, assignment of a lower priority triage score will most definitely result in a delay to care.In addition to timely pain management, evidenced based treatment of VOE should be followed. NHLBI recommendations also include the need for aggressive pain management with repeat dosing every 15–30 minutes until pain is resolved and the use of individualized opioid dosing when possible. [31] During patient interviews, patients expressed the benefit of EDs having their individual plan already in the medical record (Table 4). Use of pre-existing individualized VOE protocols can eliminate the suspicion that the patient is an addict and facilitate more rapid pain control. Aggressive management of VOE with individualized opioid pain plans, using the NHLBI recommendations, has been found to be associated with greater reductions in pain and less need for hospital admission, when compared to a weight based opioid dosing plan. [35] In a recent survey of 111 ED physicians, nurses and physician assistants in NC, less than half the respondents reported using individualized pain plans and only 1/3 were aware of the NHLBI recommendation. [18, 36] It is clear dissemination and implementation of the NHLBI VOE recommendations are needed. [32] Hospitals can easily access the recommendations and embed them within their electronic health record to improve awareness.Survey respondents in our study also indicated an opportunity for improvement in the perception held by patients that ED doctors and nurses seemed to care about the patient. This supports prior work in which patients report feeling a high degree of stigma and being treated as a drug addict by healthcare providers. [37, 38] In a survey of NC ED physicians, 49% reported concern of addiction as a barrier to treating VOE.[32] Sixty eight percent of the respondents also reported the opioid epidemic as a significant barrier to managing VOE. [32] There is no data to support a high incidence of addiction among individuals with SCD. [39–43] The opioid epidemic presents a unique challenge to treating VOE. EDs are under more pressure to avoid use of opioids, however, treatment of acute pain should always be differentiated from writing prescriptions for opioids, which ED providers should not do. ED providers should continue to advocate for treatment of acute pain, as recommended by evidence-based guidelines. Educational interventions to decrease stigma associated with treating SCD patients with opioids have been found helpful in improving attitudes towards individuals with SCD [32] ED nurses viewed a video of a patient with SCD and reported improved attitudes after viewing the video when compared to prior to viewing the video. Many educational resources are available that can help improve the knowledge base and attitudes of patients with SCD (sickleemergency.duke.edu). [24, 44] These resources can be embedded into a hospital’s learning management online system to make access and completion easier. For EDs with a large number of SCD patients, these modules should be mandatory and highly encouraged for all EDs.Finally, optimal management of any complex disease associated with a shortened lifespan such as SCD requires strong outpatient management. Coordinated care can enhance the likelihood of optimal disease management, which may lead to decreased ED visits and hospitalization. [45–47] In a sample of ED patients with SCD post ED visit, respondents identified being unable to get timely appointments, after an ED visit, approximately 28% of the time, this was affirmed during our patient interviews. During individual interviews, patients recommended it would be very helpful to have the follow-up appointment made in the ED prior to discharge. In addition to being unable to make appointments, the lack of transportation to appointments has been previously identified as a barrier to follow-up. [48] In a sample of 147 patients discharged from an ED, 11% identified transportation to a clinic as a barrier.[48] Nurses can play an important role in facilitating follow-up care. Many hospitals use case managers that can facilitate obtaining appointments and arranging for transportation. In addition to transportation, individuals with SCD have identified a wide range of unmet social behavioral health needs including difficulty with co-pays and insurance, as well as suffering from anxiety and depression. In the current sample 38% indicated insurance as a reason they avoided treatment in the ED when needed. This is similar to a previous study in which 27% indicated difficulties with insurance[48]. Case managers can help facilitate these needs as well. In NC, a partnership between EDs and the state Case Management System was formed. EDs were able to complete a brief screening tool for social and behavioral health needs. The form was faxed to the central case manager who followed-up with the patient. Over 3.5 years, over 900 referrals were made and a large shift from inactive to active case management was achieved. [49] While a statewide referral system may not be possible, it is possible to implement such a screening and referral system in an individual ED and hospital. This can ultimately lead to better identification and treatment of unmet social behavioral health needs, which may be contributing to poor health outcomes and higher ED and hospital use.
Strengths and LimitationsWe utilized multiple methods involving surveys and in-depth interviews, which allowed us to have a broader understanding of the patient’s perspective of the barriers and facilitators to the provision of ED care. A limitation in our study is participants were recruited from one center limiting generalizability of the results to the entire SCD population. We believe are findings under-report barriers and over-report satisfaction because NC has a strong organized system of sickle cell care with six centers throughout the state. Additionally the majority of study participants were affiliated with the primary study site, utilizing services in an ED that has incorporated multiple SCD patient focused strategies. Several of these strategies have been in place for several years, yet patients continue to report dissatisfaction with long wait times for analgesics and provider knowledge gaps. [23, 24] A second limitation is that self-report was used to obtain data on participant use of ambulatory and ED services and was not validated with medical record or claims data.
Conclusion
Using a multi-method approach of survey and interviews, provided a robust understanding of persistent barriers to care and to identify opportunities to improve VOE care in the ED. Patients with SCD reported a high burden of pain, moderate ED use, and high avoidance of the ED for many pain episode. Survey results indicate that persistent delays in managing VOE, gaps in provider knowledge of SCD and disbelief about pain severity contributed to low perceived quality of SCD care in the ED. These results were corroborated by qualitative interview findings that stigma associated with provider perception of drug seeking behavior is a persistent problem in the ED. Participants provided several recommendations that warrant further investigation to address persistent SCD quality of care concerns in the ED.
