Globally, asthma affects 339 million people and is associated with significant disability, health care utilization, impaired quality of life, and mortality.1–3 There are many contributors to asthma morbidity and mortality including gross national income, access to health care, air pollution, occupational exposures, and environmental tobacco smoke.1 However, it is estimated that nonadherence to asthma medications affects 30% to 70% of adults with asthma and improving adherence is a key strategy to reducing the global burden of asthma.4–7
Barriers to asthma medication adherence include, but are not limited to, poor asthma knowledge, cost, and access to health insurance.8 In research studies, these barriers are often the target of adherence interventions.9,10 However, evidence suggests that some of these barriers, including medication costs and access to health care insurance, are influenced by the sociopolitical contexts within different countries.8 To reduce the global burden of asthma, adherence interventions may need to be tailored to the sociopolitical contexts of individuals’ countries of residence.
Little is known about how barriers to asthma medication adherence might differ around the globe based on various countries’ gross national income and provision of universal health care coverage. Examining variation in barriers to adherence among countries with different sociopolitical contexts could inform the development of future interventions tailored to address individuals’ contexts.
We sought to describe and characterize trends in patient-reported barriers to asthma medication adherence in countries of varied economic wealth and health care coverage.
METHODS
We conducted a scoping literature review to identify adult asthma patient–reported barriers to asthma medication adherence among countries with varied economic wealth and universal health care policies. We categorized barriers by domains in the Theoretical Domains Framework (TDF), a framework commonly used to characterize barriers to behavior change.11
Literature search strategyWe designed our search strategy to be inclusive as possible of published and nonpublished investigations. An experienced librarian conducted searches in MEDLINE, Excerpt Medical database (EMBASE), Web of Science (WOS), and Cumulative Index to Nursing and Allied Health Literature (CINAHL) from inception to February 2017. Investigators performed quality checks to ensure that the search identified known (ie, highly publicized or impactful) studies on asthma medication adherence. Our search strategy used a combination of Medical Subject Headings terms and key words focused on “asthma,” “medication adherence,” and “qualitative methods” (see Table E1 in this article’s Online Repository at www.jaci-inpractice.org for full search strategy).We identified unpublished studies and conference abstracts through WOS. For conference abstracts, we searched for full text articles and additional reported outcomes in MEDLINE, Google Scholar, and the clinicaltrials.gov database. We excluded conference abstracts if no associated peer-reviewed publications were identified. We searched the references of studies included in our analysis and the references of prior review articles to identify additional studies that may meet our eligibility criteria. We imported all citations into DistillerSR.
Inclusion and exclusion criteriaWe established a priori study eligibility criteria (Table I). We sought to identify studies that used qualitative methods (eg, focus groups, interviews) to elicit the first-hand perspectives of adults with asthma and their caregivers’ perspectives about asthma medications. We limited to studies on adults because the barriers to adherence in children are different due to children’s rapid developmental transitions, limited input in treatment decisions, and larger dependence on caregivers.12–16 If studies included adults and children, they were included if the adult patient perspectives were reported separately from children’s perspectives. We limited to patients and their caregivers because we were interested in primary accounts of barriers to asthma medication adherence. Caregivers were included to give voice to adult patients who may not be able to adequately express their perspectives (eg, disability, limited capacity). We limited to studies using qualitative methods including focus groups and interviews. We limited to qualitative approaches that used open-ended questions to obtain a broader range of barriers to asthma medication adherence. We excluded studies that exclusively assessed barriers exclusively using closed-ended questions (eg, questionnaires) with prespecified answers because we were interested in obtaining a comprehensive list of patient-reported barriers to asthma medication adherence with minimal restriction placed by the investigators. We excluded studies that did not separately report findings for our study population (eg, adult asthma) and/or topic of interest (eg, asthma, asthma medication) (Table I).
Study selectionTwo members of the team independently reviewed each title and abstract for eligibility (SR/DC, ILR/RP, ILR/DC). Reviewers resolved conflicts by discussion, and the third reviewer (ILR or SR) adjudicated disagreements, if needed, during all stages of the review. Two team members (SR/DC) independently reviewed the full text of articles, and discrepancies in inclusion/exclusion were resolved by discussion. We recorded the main reason for exclusion at each stage of study selection. The reasons for full text exclusion were assessed in hierarchical order. We first assessed for the correct approach, and then population, perspective, and topic (Table I).
Data extraction and analysisTwo independent reviewers (SR, DC) extracted data from each study meeting our inclusion criteria with a standardized and structured form. Reviewers resolved conflicts by discussion, and the third reviewer (ILR) adjudicated disagreements.Our primary outcome of interest was patient-reported barriers to asthma medication adherence. Barriers to asthma medication adherence were categorized using the TDF. The TDF is a behavior change theory with 14 domains covering a wide range of potential barriers.17,18 Definitions for TDF domains are included in Table II.Reviewers also extracted information on studies’ population demographics (eg, age, sex), approach (eg, interview, focus group), study topic (eg, asthma, asthma medications), participants’ country of residence, the country’s World Health Organization (WHO) and World Bank income level (ie, high income, middle income, low income), and countries’ presence of universal health care.22,23 Gross national income level was defined by WHO and World Bank definition.23 We categorized studies by WHO gross national income and presence of universal health care because medication adherence is known to be associated with socioeconomic status and access to health care.8 Descriptive statistics were used to analyze the included studies.
RESULTS
We identified 2942 unique titles and abstracts and assessed 838 full text manuscripts for eligibility (Figure 1). Using our inclusion/exclusion criteria, we excluded 791 full text manuscripts. The full texts were excluded because 690 did not meet our study approach criteria by not including open-ended questions as part of their qualitative approach or by not using qualitative methods. Thirty-four did not meet the population criteria because they had pediatric or mixed pediatric and adult population without subgroup analysis of adults. Two studies did not report the perspectives of adults, or caregivers of adults, with asthma, whereas 24 did not report barriers to asthma medication adherence. Forty-one studies were excluded because they did not have full texts associated with their abstracts (Figure 1).
For our analysis, we included 47 studies meeting our inclusion criteria that were conducted in 12 countries. The included studies had a total of 2614 subjects with the mean age ranging from 19.1 to 70 years and were predominately female (67%) subjects (Table III). Most studies exclusively used interviews (N = 36) and focused on asthma medications (N = 22) or asthma in general (N = 21). Most studies were conducted in high-income countries (N = 45), few were conducted in middle-income countries (N = 2), and no studies were conducted in low-income countries. Twenty-seven studies were conducted in countries with universal health care and 20 in countries without universal health care. Of the studies (N = 20) conducted in countries without universal health care, most (N = 17) were conducted in the United States (Table III).
Eight countries were classified as high income with universal health care and included 27 studies with 1127 subjects (Table III). Two countries were classified as high income without universal health care and included 18 studies with 1327 subjects—most of the studies (N = 17) were conducted in the United States. Two studies were classified as middle income without universal health care and included 320 subjects (Table III).
Study outcomeInternationally, patient-reported barriers to asthma medication adherence are diverse. The most commonly reported barriers to asthma medication adherence were categorized as beliefs about consequences (eg, medications not needed for asthma control, N = 29, 61.7%), knowledge (eg, not knowing when to take medication, N = 27, 57.4%), and environmental context and resources (eg, costs, N = 25, 53.2%). The least commonly reported barriers were goals (eg, asthma not a priority, N = 1, 2.1%), reinforcement (eg, asthma not valued, N = 3, 6.4%), and emotion (eg, fear of dependence, stress, N = 3, 6.4%) (Table IV). Table V includes examples of barriers categorized by domains in the TDF.
Analysis by WHO gross national income level and universal health careIn high-income countries with universal health care, the 3 most commonly reported barriers were categorized as belief about consequences (N = 17, 63.3%), knowledge (N = 16, 59.3%), and social influence (N = 12, 44.4%). In high-income countries without universal health care, the most commonly reported barriers were categorized as environmental context and resources (N = 12, 66.7%), beliefs about consequences (N = 11, 61.1%), and knowledge (N = 10, 55.6%). In middle-income countries without universal health care, the most commonly reported barriers were categorized as memory, attention, and decision (N = 2, 100%); environmental context and resources (N = 2, 100%); and emotion (N = 2, 100%) (Table VI).
DISCUSSION
In this scoping review of 47 studies conducted among 12 nations, we found that study participants reported a wide range of barriers to asthma medications adherence, and that the prevalence of barriers reported appeared to differ according to the presence of universal health care and gross national income. Lack of knowledge about asthma and belief about consequences were the most frequently reported barriers across all countries. Environmental context and resources, such as cost and access to health care, were more frequently reported among studies conducted in countries without universal health care, whereas barriers related to social influences were more commonly reported in countries with universal health care. Our study can inform future adherence interventions through its description of the unique distributions of global asthma medication adherence barriers.
Our findings are consistent with the literature. Lack of knowledge and environmental context and resources are commonly cited as barriers to general medication adherence71 and specifically asthma medication adherence.72,73 Indeed, there are interventions targeting these barriers such as asthma self-management programs, motivational interviewing, and services that provide free or low cost access to asthma medications.9,10,74 However, there has been less emphasis on barriers categorized in the other domains of the TDF (eg, social identity, beliefs about consequences) despite their common occurrence in our study.
To our knowledge, this is the first international characterization of barriers to asthma medication adherence among qualitative studies in pulmonary disease. Our study is unique in that we categorized global barriers to adherence, and we used a comprehensive behavior change theory—the TDF—that can facilitate the development of future adherence interventions. There is increasing evidence that public health and health promotion interventions based on social and behavioral theory are more effective than those lacking a theoretical base.11 Theory-based conceptual models (1) identify the behavioral antecedents (ie, barriers/enablers) and their relationship to the target behavior, (2) select intervention methods to match targeted barrier/enablers, (3) inform intervention evaluation, and (4) identify “active ingredients” in interventions.75 The TDF synthesizes elements of existing behavioral theories (eg, health belief model, social cognitive theory, theory of planned behavior) most relevant to changing behavior and was developed using an expert consensus process and validation. Compared with any single behavioral theory, the TDF covers a wider range of potential barriers and enablers and is therefore likely to identify more potential intervention strategies to improve asthma medication adherence. Our study provides the necessary foundation to describe and characterize barriers that can be used as future intervention targets.
There were a few limitations to this scoping review. The 47 included studies represent 12 countries, but there were only 2 middle-income countries, no low-income countries, and no studies conducted in Eastern Europe, Middle-East, Africa, Central America, or Asia. In addition, approximately 50% of study participants were from the United States. We aimed for primary accounts of barriers to adherence so we may have missed some barriers by limiting to the perspectives of adult patients and their caregivers and excluding input from providers and health system staff. Our analysis was underpowered to statistically compare the relative prevalence of barriers. Lastly, our search was through 2017. Though the search yielded a comprehensive identification of barriers in all domains of our behavior theory, the included patient perspectives were collected before widespread use, and research of single maintenance and reliever therapy (SMART) in mild and moderate asthma and may not represent barriers to SMART.
Internationally, patients with asthma have a diverse set of barriers to asthma medication adherence. Lack of knowledge about asthma and belief about consequences were the most frequently reported barriers across all countries.The relative prevalence of barriers due to social influences was more commonly reported in high-income countries with universal health care, whereas environmental consequences and resources were more commonly reported in high-income countries without universal health care. These findings highlight the diversity in barriers to adherence in various countries, the need for interventions targeting multiple barriers to adherence, and the tailoring of intervention to the unique distribution of barriers based on the person’s sociopolitical context.
Supplementary Material
Online Repository
1
