Adoptive transfer of tumor-specific T cells can mediate durable regression of cancer1. While tumor-specific T cells can be derived from tumor infiltrating lymphocytes (TILs) or from cells engineered to express anti-tumor receptor transgenes,2,3 cells derived from the endogenous naïve repertoire4 possess several advantages. Unlike transgenic T cells, autologous naïve T cells have undergone central tolerance in the host, minimizing the risk of on-target autoimmunity.5,6 Compared to TILs, endogenous naïve cells have not been activated in the exhaustive7 and immunosuppressive8 tumor microenvironment, and can be a source of tumor-specific cells even in patients who lack pre-existing anti-tumor responses.9
Tumor-specific cells from naïve precursors are generated by stimulation with tumor antigen presented on antigen-presenting cells (APC), complex biologics that are derived for each individual patient.10 The additional culture process required to generate APC significantly increases the cost and complexity of adoptive immunotherapy. Furthermore, APC derived from cancer patients are often dysfunctional11 or immunosuppressive,12,13 further complicating the culture process.
We therefore designed an acellular T cell expansion platform termed nanoscale artificial Antigen Presenting Cells (nano-aAPC).14 Nano-aAPC are paramagnetic iron-dextran nanoparticles, 50–100 nm in diameter, functionalized with major histocompatibility complex (MHC)-peptide to bind and activate antigen-specific TCR, and a co-stimulatory anti-CD28 antibody to promote effective T cell stimulation. We have previously demonstrated that nano-aAPC can induce robust expansion of human memory T cells and transgenic mouse cells.14
However, we and others have not been able to target the naïve T cell repertoire, which has a higher threshold for activation15 than the memory pool. TCR are clustered at the nanoscale in a physiologically regulated fashion,16 ultimately resulting in decreased binding of TCR on naïve cells by nanoparticles.17 Despite this challenge, nanoparticles are preferred to microparticle based platforms because they are significantly more biocompatible and have favorable in vivo trafficking and biodistribution,18–20 making them compatible for in vivo infusion. Furthermore, the first TCR signaling events occur in nanoscale TCR clusters,17,21 suggesting that under appropriate conditions 50–100nM nano-aAPC could be used to engage and activate robust TCR signaling.
Tumor-specific naïve precursors are extremely rare, with frequencies reported as few as one per million, more than an order of magnitude lower than the anti-viral immune response.22–24 APC-based methods for primary naïve tumor-specific cell expansion thus require stimulation over many weeks or months, often followed by T cell selection and sub-cloning,25 to generate the large number of tumor specific cells required for adoptive immunotherapy.26–28 The ideal T cell expansion platform would generate robust expansion that minimized culture time and reduced expense.
To meet these requirements, we hypothesized that enrichment of antigen-specific cells prior to activation and culture would reduce competition for growth signals such as cytokines and MHC binding. We therefore utilized nano- aAPC to bind and capture antigen-specific cells in a magnetic column prior to culture, the first use of a single platform to enrich and subsequently expand a targeted T cell population in vitro.
Here, we show that Enrichment + Expansion (E+E) streamlines the generation of large numbers and high frequencies of antigen-specific cells from naive precursors. Moreover, we find that enrichment prior to expansion confers a proliferation advantage during both in vitro culture and after in vivo adoptive transfer. This approach reliably expands T cells recognizing not only previously known “shared” tumor antigens, but also computationally predicted “neo-epitopes” based on unique tumor mutation patterns.29 This is the first in vitro generation of anti-tumor responses against predicted neo-epitope responses from naïve cells, and could thus form the basis of a personalized tumor immunotherapy strategy even in patients who lack pre-existing responses.
Results And Discussion
Antigen-Specific T Cell Enrichment With Nano-aAPCT cell stimulation requires two activating signals delivered by endogenous APC: signal 1, a cognate antigenic peptide presented in the context of MHC that binds the TCR; and signal 2, one of a number of co-stimulatory receptors that modulate T cell responses.30 Nano-aAPC are synthesized by coupling chimeric MHC-Ig dimer (signal 1) and anti-CD28 antibody (signal 2) to 50–100 nm paramagnetic iron-dextran nanoparticles (Figure 1A).Enrichment with nano-aAPC is performed by incubating naive, polyclonal mouse CD8+T lymphocytes with nano-aAPC, passing the cell-particle mixture through a magnetic column, eluting and then culturing the magnet-bound fraction (Figure 1b). To assess efficacy of enrichment prior to culture, a known number of Thy1.1+ pmel TCR transgenic T cells specific for Db-GP100 melanoma antigen were mixed at a 1:1000 ratio with Thy1.2+ CD8 T cells from wild type B6 mice. After enrichment with Db-GP100 aAPC, the frequency of pmel T cells increased more than 10-fold, from 0.07% before enrichment to 1.17% after enrichment, in a dose-dependent manner (Figure 2a). Optimizing the amount of nano-aAPC incubated with T cells increased the enrichment efficiency and resulted in recovery of up 95% of the added pmel T cells (Figure 2b).Enrichment of wild-type Db-GP100 cells from endogenous B6 CD8+ splenocytes was assessed by staining with soluble MHC pentamer. Db-GP100 specific frequency was undetectable prior to enrichment, but increased to 0.30% afterward. The frequency of non-specific Kb-TRP2 cells incubated with Db-GP100 particles did not increase (Figure 2c).
Antigen-Specific T-Cell Expansion After EnrichmentEnrichment + Expansion was performed using nano-aAPC bearing the melanoma antigens TRP2 (Kb-TRP2) and GP100 (Db-GP100), the Kb-restricted ovalbumin antigen SIIN (Kb-SIIN), and the colon carcinoma antigen Ld-AH1/A5 (Ld-A5); peptide sequences and proteins of origin are listed in Supplementary Table 1. After enrichment, magnet-bound fractions of enriched cells and nano-aAPC were eluted and cultured in vitro. Seven days after enrichment, antigen-specific populations were detectable by MHC multimer staining for all four antigens examined (Figure 3a). Antigen-specific frequencies and absolute numbers of cells generated in one week varied by antigen. Kb-TRP2 and Kb-SIINF consistently generated a higher frequency of antigen specific cells (13.9 ± 5.2% and 20.0 ± 9.2%, respectively) than Db-GP100 or Ld-A5 (4.3± 0.6 % and 6.9± 0.1 %, respectively) (Figure 3b). This was reflected in the total number of antigen-specific cells that could be generated in one week from 10 million precursors, which ranged from 130,000 ± 10,000 for Kb-TRP2 to 35,000 ± 10,000 for Db-GP100 (Figure 3b; Table 1).To study the effect of enrichment on subsequent proliferation, the enrichment procedure was “undone” in control samples by collecting the negative fraction (CD8+ T cells that passed through the magnetic column) and adding it back to the positive fraction (Figure 3c). Thus, we compared cells that had undergone the same nano-aAPC binding and culture process as E+E cells, but did not have the benefit of enrichment, to those that had been enriched. Enrichment significantly enhanced both antigen-specific frequency and total antigen-specific cell yield. In a representative sample, seven days after enrichment with a Kb-TRP2 nano-aAPC, 17.6% of cells expanded from the positive fraction were Kb-TRP2 specific, compared to 1.46% of cells from the control unenriched group (Figure 3d). Similarly, 4.59% of Db-GP100 Positive fraction cells were antigen specific, compared to 0.45% in the unenriched group (Figure 3d). On average, E+E yielded a 12.2 ± 2.3 fold-increase in the frequency for Kb-TRP2, a 36.4 ± 14.9 fold increase for Db-GP100, and a 19.9 ± 11.6 fold increase for Kb-SIINF-specific T cells (Figure 3e). Enrichment also significantly increased the total number of antigen-specific cells, ranging from a 3.5 ± 0.4 fold increase for Kb-TRP2 to 7.6 ± 0.9 fold for Kb-SIINF and 11.1 ± 4.1 fold for Db-GP100 (Figure 3e; see Supplementary Figure 1 for absolute antigen-specific frequency and total antigen-specific cells yields).Effective enrichment was achieved with nano- but not microscale aAPC. Micro-aAPC made from 4.5 μm diameter iron-dextran particles and coated with MHC-Ig dimer and anti-CD28 were synthesized as described previously.31 T cells frequently formed conjugates with non-cognate micro-aAPC, resulting in little to no enrichment of antigen-specific cells (Supplementary Figure 2). In contrast, nano-aAPC bound T cells with high specificity and low background. Thus, using our current formulations, nano-aAPC are a more effective reagent for antigen-specific enrichment.
Fold-ExpansionT cell proliferation was estimated from previously determined precursor frequencies (Table 1). Precursor frequencies for CD8 responses to foreign antigens range from 10 to 100 cells per 10 million T-cells.24 Self-antigens such as TRP2 are expected to be at the lower end of this range. Precursor frequencies for Db-GP100 have been measured at 10 cells per 107 T-cells22, and 20–350 cells per 107 T-cells for Kb-SIINF.24 After one week, 130,000 TRP2-specific cells were generated from 107 CD8 T cells; thus, we estimate TRP2-specific proliferation was 1,000- to 10,000-fold. In comparison, approximately 35,000 Db-GP100and 150,000 Kb-SIINF specific T cells were generated from 107 T cells, indicating up to 5,000 fold expansion for each antigen. This is comparable to the robust expansion observed after viral infection in vivo.32To validate these estimates, we labeled naive T cell populations with the proliferation marker dye CFSE, which is diluted two-fold with every round of T cell division. Four days following E+E, Kb-TRP2 tetramer binding T cells had diluted their CFSE below detectable limits (Supplementary Figure 3a). Transgenic pmel T cells stimulated with a moderate dose of nano-aAPC were used for comparison; these cells showed multiple peaks of CFSE fluorescence, indicating between 2–7 rounds of division. By comparison, Enriched + Expanded TRP2-specific T cells had completed more than 7 rounds of division, consistent with greater than 256-fold expansion after only four days, in line with estimates of precursor frequency. Expanded T cells, both TRP-2 as well as SIY-specific, showed a CD62L-low, CD44-high effector memory phenotype (see Supplementary Figure 3b for details), consistent with robust activation and proliferation.T cell expansion by E+E was significantly more robust than expansion using mature, bone marrow derived dendritic cells pulsed with TRP2 peptide33 (Supplementary Figure 4a). Stimulation of ten million naive lymphocytes for one week resulted in 2 ± 0.5 × 104 TRP2-specific T cells, with antigen-specific frequencies between 0.5–2.85%, approximately 10-fold lower in number and frequency than that achieved with E+E (Supplementary Figure 4b). This is consistent with expansion by APC and artificial APC in humans, where antigen-specific responses after one week of stimulation are frequently not detectable.34
Simultaneous Expansion of Multiple Anti-Tumor ResponsesSimultaneous generation of T cell responses to multiple tumor antigens would increase the number of anti-tumor T cells generated from a single naive T cell population, and reduce the likelihood of tumor immune escape due to down-regulation of a single antigen.35–37 We therefore developed a single-step E+E protocol for generating multiple anti-tumor populations simultaneously.Naive lymphocytes were incubated with nano-aAPC bearing Db-GP100, Kb-SIINF, and Kb-TRP2, each at the standard single-antigen dose. One week after “triple” E+E, antigen-specific T cells were detected by pentamer staining against each antigen of interest (Figure 3f). While the frequency of each population was lower than that found with T-cells stimulated with only one antigen (Figure 3g), the total number of antigen-specific T-cells was similar whether stimulated with individual antigens or with three antigens (p>0.4by two-way ANOVA) (Figure 3g). Thus, the total number of cells generated against antigens of interest was larger than for single-specificity cultures.
Expansion of Neo-AntigensThe tumor antigens described thus far are previously known “shared antigens” derived from proteins that are over-expressed in tumors, and present on or shared between tumors from multiple patients. With the advent of genome-wide sequencing, it has been shown that most cancers contain clonal, non-synonymous single base pair substitutions that may bind to the patient’s MHC, thereby opening up new avenues for immunotherapy.29 Subsequent analyses have reinforced this idea.38–45 These “neo-antigens” have theoretical advantages over shared antigens as tumor targets, such as greater specificity for tumor tissue and potentially higher-affinity TCR-MHC interactions. However, the pattern of mutation is unique in each cancer, and methods must be developed for rapid personalized identification and targeting of these neo-antigens.To generate T cell responses against neo-antigens using Enrichment + Expansion, we utilized published “mutomes” described for the mouse melanoma line B16 and colon carcinoma line CT26.46,47 Briefly, genomic and transciptomic data sets were combined to identify expressed single base pair substitutions (Figure 4a). Eight or nine flanking amino acids upstream and downstream of each SBS were extracted in silico. These ~17-amino acid sequences were then processed by NetMHC, an algorithm that predicts binding of peptides to human HLA as well as mouse MHC alleles using an artificial neural network48. This algorithm predicted amino acid neo-epitopes 8 to 10 amino acids in length for CT26 and B16 (Supplementary Table 2). Seven candidate peptides representing a wide range of predicted affinities, 2 from CT26 and 5 from B16, were synthesized and used to generate neo-epitope specific nano-aAPC. E+E with nano-aAPC bearing these neo-epitopes was then performed and evaluated with MHC multimers at Day 7.Antigen-specific populations from Day 7 cultures were identified for both of the two CT26-derived candidate peptides tested (FPS and SAF). Figure 4b shows representative Day 7 cognate MHC staining of Ld-FPS and Ld-SAF activated samples. Peptides derived from the B16 mutome showed responsive (Db-YTG) and non-responsive (Kb-LAY) staining patterns (Figure 4b); overall 2/5 peptides explored (Db-YTG and Kb-VDW) showed strong responses, 2/5 showed moderate responses (Db-IAM and Db-RTF), and 1/5 was non-responsive (Kb-LAY). Peptide affinity for MHC as predicted by NetMHC (Supplementary Table 2) did not accurately predict E+E response; strong responders YTG and VDW had low predicted affinities at 991 and 9066 nM respectively, whereas the non-responder LAY and equivocal responder IAM had high predicted affinities at 69 and 5 nM respectively. Overall, the total number of cells generated at Day 7 approximated those observed with the shared antigens Db-GP100 and Ld-A5, ranging from 15,000 – 40,000 (Figure 4c), but was less than the shared antigens Kb-TRP2 and Kb-SIIN.
Effect of Enrichment on Proliferation After Adoptive TransferThe use of enrichment in addition to expansion is motivated by the observation that adoptively transferred tumor-specific T cells compete with co-transferred, non-tumor specific T-cells for growth signals.49–51 However, this effect has not been demonstrated for antigen-specific T cells that have been previously activated in vitro, as occurs during E+E. We thus combined tumor-specific pmel T cells and polyclonal, wild-type B6 T cells in ratios that approximated the antigen specific frequencies achieved with and without E+E (10% and 1%, respectively). In each group, the total number of pmel T cells administered was the same (105); only the amount of non-specific T cells differed (106 or 107). The largest number and highest frequency of pmel T cells were observed in mice receiving fewer (106) non-specific T-cells (Figure 5a–b). Approximately 5.5 ± 1.5 × 105 pmel T cells were recovered from the spleen and lymph nodes of these animals (Figure 5b). Only 1.4 ± 0.7 × 105 pmel T cells were recovered from animals receiving 107 non-specific T-cells (p<0.05 by two-way ANOVA with Tukey post-test). Thus, removal of competition from co-transferred cells enhanced engraftment and expansion after transfer.In addition, tumor-specific T cells compete with host cells for growth signals,52 which has motivated the use of host radio- and chemo-based lymphodepletion prior to adoptive transfer.53,54 Thus, animals receiving 106 or 107 non-specific T-cells were either irradiated with 500 cGy gamma radiation 24 hours prior to transfer or left untreated, generating four experimental groups. Animals that were not irradiated showed poor engraftment, with less than 0.3× 105 pmel T cells recovered in either the 106 or 107 bystander group (Figure 5a–b). Thus, removal of both transferred bystander lymphocytes and host lymphocytes significantly increased the yield of adoptively transferred tumor-specific T cells in the host.
Tumor Killing Using Enriched and Expanded T cellsWe next determined whether tumor-specific lymphocytes generated by E+E could mediate rejection of established melanoma. B16–F10 cells, which form aggressive and poorly immunogenic melanomas, were implanted subcutaneously into B6 host mice and allowed to grow for eight days until tumors were palpable. In parallel, CD8 lymphocytes were isolated from naive B6 donor mice and Enriched + Expanded against Db-GP100 and Kb-TRP2 antigens for seven days, then transferred into hosts one day after lymphodepletion.Animals receiving tumor-specific E+E donor lymphocytes had significantly less tumor growth than untreated mice or mice receiving equivalent numbers of lymphocytes generated against irrelevant Kb-SIINF antigen (Figure 5c). Eighteen days after tumor injection, mean tumor volume in untreated mice was 757 ± 98 mm3, similar to Kb-SIINF treated mice (881 ± 104 mm3) but much greater than in Db-GP100/Kb-TRP2 treated mice (70 ± 40 mm3; p<0.05 by ANOVA with Tukey post-test).All mice in untreated and Kb-SIINF treated groups were sacrificed by day 22 due to excessive tumor burden. By comparison, no mice in the Db-GP100/Kb-TRP2 group were sacrificed until day 24, and 2/8 mice had no detectable tumor 2 months after implantation (p<0.01 by Mantel-Cox). Median survival was significantly greater in the E+E treated group (28 days) than the untreated (20 days) or non-cognate treated (20 days) group. Thus, E+E lymphocytes cultured from naive cells for only a week were able to delay and in some cases completely reject established B16 melanoma.
Expansion of Human Tumor AntigensEnrichment + Expansion with nano-aAPC functionalized with human HLA-A2 permitted robust expansion against the tumor antigens NY-ESO-1 and MART1 from naïve donors. Human CD8+ lymphocytes were isolated from peripheral blood mononuclear cells of healthy donors, and E+E was performed with nano-aAPC bearing either NY-ESO1 or MART1 tumor antigens. After one week, 44,000 ± 21,000 NY-ESO1 specific cells were generated, representing approximately 1000-fold precursor expansion (Table 1, Figure 6). For MART1 responses, 83,000 ± 37,000 were generated in one week; this represents approximately 100-fold expansion, reflecting the high precursor frequency of MART1 responses found even in healthy donors 55 (Table 1, Figure 6). Expansion was significantly enhanced by coupling MHC to a solid aAPC support, as soluble MHC-peptide did not induce significant expansion (Supplementary Figure 5a). Thus, Enrichment + Expansion is not limited to murine T cells, but is also a robust approach for the expansion of naïve, low frequency, anti-tumor human CTL.
Conclusion
Widespread application of adoptive immunotherapy for cancer is limited by the availability of safe, cost-effective and convenient sources of tumor-specific cells. Here, we developed a streamlined technology for quickly expanding large numbers of high frequency tumor-specific lymphocytes from naive cells, with more than 1000-fold expansion in one week. Removing irrelevant cells by enrichment confers a 3–10 fold increase in total antigen-specific cell number after in vitro culture, and a 3–4 fold increase after in vivo transfer, resulting in approximately 10–40 fold increase in total antigen-specific cells in the host.
While antigen-specific T cells can be enriched using MHC tetramers after T cell expansion, 56–58 our platform simplifies this process by coupling enrichment and expansion in a single reagent. Furthermore, cross-linking of TCR by multimeric MHC in the absence of co-stimulation can induce T cell apoptosis or anergy, 59–61 with deletion of up to one-half of antigen-specific cells after tetramer engagement.
Furthermore, we have previously reported on the use of magnetic fields as a method to induce clustering of paramagnetic-particle bound TCR, enhancing T cell activation.17 Nano-aAPC bound to T cells in a magnetic field aggregate on the cell surface, inducing CD3 clustering, strong T cell activation and up to 5-fold increased expansion. The contribution of magnet-induced clustering during E+E remains to be explored, but may represent an additional method for enhancing T cell activation during magnetic enrichment with nanoparticles.
E+E compared favorably, both in terms of total number and purity, to existing attempts to generate robust expansion in a short period. For example, expansion of NY-ESO1 specific T cells with dendritic cell-based methods after one week in culture is either undetectable or not reported (Supplementary Table 3), making the achievement of antigen specific purities between 4–27% with 1000-fold expansion all the more remarkable. In contrast, several groups have reported effective expansion of the high precursor frequency MART1 response (Supplementary Table 3). For example, the DC-based ACE-CD8 platform described by Wölfl et al62 is a well-characterized system that has been useful for defining and optimizing requirements for expansion of human CD8 cells. This procedure results in an impressive 10 day expansion; however, the lack of a cellular expansion platform or feeder cell remains a primary advantage of nano-aAPC based approaches, eliminating the need for additional plasmapharesis or culture to generate activator cells.
Assuming tumor-specific T cell precursor frequencies of approximately 1–10 per million, ~0.5×1010CD8 T cells harvested from a single leukapharesis, and 1000–5000 fold expansion with E+E, more than 108 antigen specific T cells could be generated in one week, possibly sufficient for therapy.63–65 We were further able to simultaneously expand T cell responses against three antigens in a single culture without loss of total cell yield for any single antigen; this suggests that proliferation under these conditions is limited by T cell proliferative response rather than culture media or cytokine support, and that simultaneously expanding multiple antigens would increase the total tumor cell yield, generating sufficient cells for infusion (108 to 1010 tumor-reactive T cells63–65).
We also generated antigen-specific responses to predicted neo-epitopes, with response sizes on the order of magnitude seen with shared tumor antigens. Our success rate, 6/7, was higher than that described in previously published reports,46 likely reflecting use of an experimentally curated mutome that may not be representative of candidate lists obtained using current prediction algorithms. Nevertheless, our approach represents a proof-of-concept method for rapid expansion and validation of neo-epitopes for specific immunotherapy based on computational prediction and expansion with E+E.
Tumor-specific neo-epitopes can be identified across a wide variety of cancers,39 with certain stereotypical mutations in oncogene hotspots such as codons 12, 13, and 61 of kras shared in up to 30% of patients,40 in addition to a large number patient-specific mutations. This suggests two possible therapeutic strategies: 1) a precision approach, where a small number of commonly shared neo-epitopes are expanded using off-the-shelf nano-aAPC, and 2) a fully personalized approach, where custom-tailored aAPC are designed after whole-exome sequencing and neo-epitope prediction. The optimal strategy will likely depend on a patient’s unique mutation burden, as well as the frequency of tumor-specific responses that can be generated in a given individual. This latter parameter remains poorly characterized, and we propose that Enrichment + Expansion could serve as a rapid assay for characterizing the tumor-specific T cell repertoire.
In summary, by eliminating the need to culture cellular APCs and streamlining the generation of large numbers of high-frequency tumor-specific T cells, Enrichment + Expansion improves upon existing methods for T cell expansion from naïve precursors, and may be a powerful addition to autologous tumor immunotherapy protocols.
Materials and Methods
Mice and reagentsPmel TCR/Thy1a Rag−/− transgenic mice were a gift from Nicholas Restifo (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD) and maintained as homozygotes. C57BL/6j and Balb/C mice were purchased from Jackson Laboratories (Bar Harbor, ME). All mice were maintained according to Johns Hopkins University’s Institutional Review Board. Fluorescently labeled monoclonal antibodies were purchased from BioLegend (San Diego, CA) and BD (San Jose, CA).
Preparation of MHC-Ig Dimers and Nano-aAPCSoluble MHC-Ig dimers, Kb-Ig, Db-Ig, and A2-Ig were prepared and loaded with peptides as described,34 see supplementary methods. Nano-aAPC were manufactured by direct conjugation of MHC-Ig dimer and anti-CD28 antibody (37.51; BioLegend) to MACS Microbeads (Miltenyi Biotec) as described previously14.
Lymphocyte IsolationMouse lymphocytes were obtained from homogenized mouse spleens and lymph nodes after hypotonic lysis of RBC. Cytotoxic lymphocytes were isolated using a CD8 magnetic enrichment column from Miltenyi Biotec (Cologne, Germany) following the manufacturer’s instructions. When applicable, cells were labeled with carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester (CFSE) for 15 minutes at 37°C, then washed extensively.For human studies, the ethical committee of the Johns Hopkins University approved this study and all healthy volunteers gave written informed consent. PBMC of HLA-A2+ donors were obtained by density gradient centrifugation (Lymphocyte Separation Medium Ficoll-Paque, GE Healthcare). Subsequently, CD8+ T cells were isolated using a CD8 magnetic enrichment column from Miltenyi Biotec (Cologne, Germany).
Enrichment and ExpansionNano-aAPC were stored at a concentration of 8.3 nM (5×1012 particles/mL), and all volumes refer to particles at this concentration. 10 million CD8-enriched lymphocytes at ~108cells/ml were incubated with 10 μl of nano-aAPC for 1 hour at 4°C, for an approximate bead:cell concentration of 5000:1. Cell-particle mixtures were subsequently passed through a magnetic enrichment column, the negative fraction was collected and the positive fraction eluted. Isolated fractions were mixed and cultured in 96-well round bottom plates for 7 days in complete RPMI-1640 medium supplemented with 10% human autologous serum and 3% T cell growth factor, a cytokine cocktail derived from stimulated PBMC as described in (66), in a humidified 5% CO2, 37 °C incubator for 1 week. Specificity of CTL was monitored on day 0 and 7, by FACS analysis following tetramer and dimeric MHC-Ig staining. The number of antigen-specific cells was calculated by multiplying the number of total cells by the fractions of CD8 and antigen-specific cells; the fraction of antigen-specific cells was calculated after subtracting the non-cognate MHC staining from cognate MHC staining.
Neo-Epitope PredictionThe DNA and RNA from CT26 cells were used to identify somatic mutations and the transcriptome of this line through massively parallel sequencing. The methods used to prepare libraries for analysis on an Illumina HiSeq 2500 instrument are described in (47). The predictions of neo-epitopes were performed as previously described, with the exception that netMHCpan was used for epitope prediction.47 Briefly, genomic and transciptomic data sets were combined to identify expressed single base pair substitutions (SBS). The eight flanking amino acids upstream and downstream of each SBS were extracted in silico. This 17-amino acid peptide sequence was then processed by NetMHCpan version 2.4 to identify moderate (<500nM) to high (<50nM) affinity 9-amino acid peptides for all H-2d alleles. Candidate epitopes were then selected from among these moderate to high affinity peptides for experimental testing.The B16 murine melanoma line was previously sequenced and 50 expressed mutations identified.46 In that paper, mutations were tested for their ability to elicit an immune response relative to the wild type peptide; however detailed peptide epitopes were not identified. Full protein sequences were determined from Uniprot.org, from which nine flanking amino acids upstream and downstream of each mutation were extracted. Each 19-amino acid sequence was processed by NetMHC versions 3.4 and 3.2 to determine H-2b binding affinity of potential 8-, 9-, and 10-amino acid binders. For each SBS, the highest affinity peptide was selected for further analysis. A list of top candidate epitopes was compiled based on the epitope meeting either of the following criteria: 1) moderate to high affinity predicted binding affinity to H-2b allele, or 2) higher mutant peptide immunogenicity relative to the wild type peptide, based on the work of Castle, et al.
Bystander In Vivo ExperimentsMixtures of pmel and wild-type B6 CD8+ T lymphocytes were mixed at the indicated ratios. Cell mixtures were cultured for one week with 20 μl of Db-GP100 nano-aAPC prior to adoptive transfer to activate PMEL T cells. Transient lymphopenia was induced in host mice by sub-lethal irradiation (500 cGy) one day before adoptive transfer with a MSD Nordion Gammacell dual Cs137 source (Johns Hopkins Molecular Imaging Center) in the indicated groups. Mice were treated both the day of and the day after adoptive transfer with 30,000 units intraperitoneal IL-2. Seven and twenty-days after adoptive transfer, three mice per group were sacrificed and lymphocytes were isolated from peripheral blood, spleen, and inguinal, cervical, and axillary lymph nodes, and then stained with anti-Thy1.1 antibody.
Therapeutic T Cell TransferTumor rejection experiments were performed as described above, except 3×105 B16 melanoma cells were injected subcutaneously ten days prior to adoptive T cell transfer. Transient lymphopenia was induced one day before adoptive transfer sub-lethal irradiation. Ten million naive lymphocytes from each donor were used to generate antigen-specific cells for each tumor-bearing host (up to 3 hosts per donor), containing approximately 2×105 tumor-specific T cells per mouse. Mice were treated with 30,000 units intraperitoneal IL-2 one day before and one day after adoptive transfer of T-cells. Tumor growth was monitored at 2-day intervals using digital calipers, with volume calculated using an ellipsoid approximate, volume = ½ × length × width. Mice were sacrificed once tumors reached 900 mm3.
Supplementary Material
Supplemental Figures
