Introduction
In the immune system, regulatory events that control cell states and cell fates unfold over a staggeringly wide-range of timescales (Figure 1). During an immune response, B and T lymphocytes activate signaling pathways within seconds, but differentiate into effector and memory cells only days to weeks later. Similarly, in response to differentiation signals, lymphocyte progenitors proceed through an intricate choreography of developmental stages, each of which is orchestrated over many days. The timing of these stages allows progenitors to perform developmental functions, such as antigen receptor rearrangement, repertoire selection, and expansion into a mature, selected cell population (Figure 1). Despite its implicit importance, much remains unknown about how timing is set during lymphocyte development and differentiation. In particular, how timing is specified at extended timescales, ranging from days to months, is a mystery. While specific examples of lymphocyte timing control have been elucidated1, general principles remain unclear.
By drawing upon older and more recent literature, we present evidence for a distinct class of cis-regulatory elements, which we term “timing enhancers”, that control the timing of gene expression and cell fate transitions. Enhancers are non-coding DNA elements that mediate the establishment of lineage-specific gene programs during cell differentiation. Their importance for optimal immune function is underscored by the large enrichment of disease-associated polymorphisms within their sequences2. While enhancers are often assumed to control the expression levels of genes3,4, there is evidence that enhancers can control the timing at which genes switch on, and do so over extended timescales spanning many days and cell generations.
Here, we first provide a definition of timing enhancers that distinguishes them from other types of enhancer control. We then review evidence for timing enhancers in lymphocyte development and differentiation. Next we discuss potential molecular mechanisms underlying timing enhancer function. Finally, we review evidence that disruptions to timing enhancers, by altering gene activation kinetics, can perturb immune response dynamics and contribute to immunopathology.
Timing enhancers: a definition
Enhancers are non-coding DNA sequences that act in cis to promote the expression of their target genes. Their action is critical to the proper establishment of cell lineage-specific gene expression programs during multicellular development and function. Soon after their discovery in the early 1980s, it was observed from single-cell measurements that enhancers could impact gene expression dynamics in different ways5. In particular, some enhancers increase the amplitude of expression of their target genes6,7, whereas others increase the likelihood of their activation in an all-or-none manner8,9.
Tremendous progress has since been made to elucidate the molecular basis of enhancer action10–14, and to define and classify enhancer types based on distinguishing molecular features. However, as these newer classifications mostly arise from bulk-averaged measurements, it remains unclear how they map onto dynamic mechanisms of enhancer control observed at the single-cell level. Here we elaborate on a formal definition of enhancer types based on their dynamic modes of gene expression control. This framework will provide a lens through which one can discern these distinct types of enhancer function in lymphocytes.
Based on older and more recent studies in single cells, there is growing evidence that enhancers can modulate either the expression levels of their target genes or the timing at which these genes become expressed. As such, we propose classifying enhancers into two types: amplitude enhancers and timing enhancers (Figure 2). We note that a single enhancer can sometimes have both timing and amplitude control functions. While discussing enhancers with mixed functionality, our classification scheme allows one to discern distinct modes of dynamic control.
Timing enhancers control the timing at which their target genes switch from a silent to an active chromatin state, which is then accessible to the transcriptional machinery. Switching is initiated by the binding of trans-factors to the enhancer; however, even with full trans-factor induction and binding, switching does not occur rapidly. Rather, switching occurs only after an extended time delay that can range from hours to days, and possibly longer (Figure 2, top left). In some cases, this time delay can span multiple cell generations, implying that some genes can switch between stable chromatin states that are heritable across cell division. This ability to control switching between different heritable states links timing enhancers to chromatin-based mechanisms that can stably propagate across cell division15–17, a point we discuss further below. It also accounts for chromatin state as a kinetic barrier that can explain the delay between trans-factor action and gene activation.
As seen in a range of studies6,7,18, gene activation delays generated by timing enhancers are inherently probabilistic, such that cells in a uniform population turn on the target gene at different times, even when they concurrently upregulate trans-factors that bind the enhancer. As a result of this variability, initially homogeneous cell populations could generate multiple subpopulations with or without target gene expression, also termed “variegated expression” in the earlier literature (Figure 2, top right). This heterogeneity arises even upon exposure to uniform signals. Variability in activation is likely linked to the probabilistic nature of chromatin state switching, as observed across diverse systems19–21.
The ability of timing enhancers to control chromatin states links them to “locus control regions” (LCRs). LCRs are extended cis-regulatory elements that can establish active chromatin states at proximal regions to drive cell-type specific gene expression22. LCRs are in turn closely related to a more recently defined class of cis-regulatory elements, termed “super-enhancers” or “stretch enhancers”23,24. These elements typically contain multiple modules of transcription factor binding sites that are distributed over an extended genomic region. Individual modules within LCRs may harbor timing control functions; however, we note that timing enhancers do not necessarily reside within LCRs or super-enhancers25,26.
Amplitude enhancers, on the other hand, modulate the expression magnitude of their target genes. To do so, they increase the transcription rate of their target genes, by recruiting trans- factors that load or drive elongation of RNA polymerase II at an already accessible locus (Figure 2, bottom left). Like chromatin state switching, transcription initiation is also a stochastic process27–29, occuring in intermittent bursts of polymerase loading and release from a gene promoter. Amplitude enhancers appear to primarily control burst initiation frequencies30–33, though they may also control burst duration34. However, unlike chromatin state switching as controlled by timing enhancers, transcriptional bursting is transient, and occurs over fast timescales, ranging from seconds to tens of minutes34. As a result, the primary effect of an amplitude enhancer is to generate graded changes in expression magnitude within a single population (Figure 2, bottom right). This is in contrast to timing enhancers, which generate distinct, stable subpopulations with discrete levels of target gene expression. Thus, amplitude enhancers, by controlling bursting kinetics, would modulate mean expression levels of their target gene across a single population, and do so relatively rapidly in response to trans-factor binding. Amplitude enhancers are important for maintaining proper levels of expression after a gene locus has been activated, and we contrast them with timing enhancers here to distinguish between the functional properties of these regulatory elements; however, in keeping with the focus of this review, we do not discuss them further here.
Potential functions of timing enhancers
What functional roles could timing enhancers play in immune development and function? Broadly speaking, timing enhancers endow lymphocytes with an ability to regulate the timescales of immune regulatory events in a cell-autonomous manner (Figure 3A). Immune cells execute carefully choreographed functions while being mobile and broadly distributed throughout tissues and organs. Thus, they may benefit from the use of cell-autonomous timekeeping mechanisms to set the pace and order of fate transitions independently of environmental signals35. For instance, upon antigen stimulation, T cells enter an activated state, where they proliferate explosively before either re-entering a quiescent state or undergoing cell death. The duration of this activated state, and the degree of cell proliferation it undergoes, is set by a cell-autonomous timer that persists upon antigen withdrawal36,37. Autonomous timekeeping mechanisms may play roles in controlling other cellular transitions in lymphocyte development and function; however, for most processes it remains to be determined how autonomous timers contribute. By controlling the activation of lineage-specifying genes, timing enhancers could enable cells to delay their differentiation upon receiving instructive signals, as observed in a number of other developmental systems38,39. On the other hand, by controlling the activation of cytokines or other effector genes, timing enhancers could control the pace or duration of immune effector responses.
In the absence of competing regulation, all cells that await activation of a gene controlled by a timing enhancer would eventually turn it on, given enough time (Figure 3A). Indeed, complete gene activation in a cell population is sometimes observed25. However, in some cases, a gene may be competent for activation only during a limited time window, or may be blocked from activation by the expression of an antagonistic regulator, such that only a fraction of cells end up activating and expressing the gene (Figure 3B). In this case, the strength of the timing enhancer not only affects the initial kinetics of gene induction, but also controls the final fraction of cells in the end population that stably express the target gene. In many of the examples discussed below, perturbations of candidate timing enhancers that control lineage-specifying genes are linked to changes in the proportions of immune cell types26,40,41. Thus, timing enhancers could have integral roles in maintaining different cell populations at proper sizes and proportions for optimal immune system function.
Timing enhancers in lymphocytes
Early experiments studying enhancers at the single-cell level established the concept that enhancers can modulate the probability of gene expression in an all-or-none manner6,7,42. However, many questions remained unresolved from this work. Because these early studies were performed by transfection of reporter genes, it was unclear whether enhancers at endogenous loci also work in similar ways. Additionally, it remained unclear whether such enhancers could have functional roles, such as timing control of cell-fate specifying genes to alter population fractions. Finally, despite subsequent work that has since shed light on the first two questions, it remained unresolved whether heterogeneity in gene activation is indeed caused by variability in the timing of gene activation via the direct action of enhancers or whether it may instead reflect variability in cell states that indirectly affect enhancer activity. This uncertainty lingered, in part, because of the challenges in directly measuring gene activation dynamics at single gene loci in single cells.
Enhancers loop over to regulate their target genes on the same chromosome, in cis; thus, to definitely show that they control the activation timing of their target genes, it is first necessary to establish that time delays in gene activation can occur in cis, at individual gene loci. In most standard models of gene regulation43–45, the timing of gene activation is assumed to be regulated in trans, through changes in the levels or activity of upstream transcription factors43,46,47. In such a model, transcription factor levels would need to reach a certain threshold before changing the expression state of a target gene. On the other hand, if gene activation delays occur in cis, as predicted by the timing enhancer model, they can arise even when upstream transcription factors are already fully present21,48,49.
Do the enhancers seen in earlier experiments change gene expression probability by acting in cis, as predicted by the timing enhancer model? Or do they simply integrate changes in trans-factors levels, which are the determinants of gene activation timing? To answer these questions clearly, one would need to distinguish cis and trans mechanisms. In general, it has been challenging to measure the relative contribution of of cis-acting steps to gene activation, independently from the effects of evolving transcription factor levels.
A powerful way to distinguish these two modes of control is by separately monitoring both copies of a gene in single cells50 (Figure 4). Transcription factors affect both alleles of a gene simultaneously in trans, whereas epigenetic chromatin regulation can function independently at each gene copy in cis. If the rates of gene activation or silencing were controlled solely by transcription factor levels, changes in the expression state of each gene copy should occur nearly simultaneously. However, if the rates of gene activation or silencing are additionally controlled by epigenetic chromatin regulation, each copy could adopt distinct expression states even within the same nucleus (Figure 4A). Therefore, by tracking the activation dynamics of single gene copies in single cells over time, one can investigate the role for epigenetic chromatin regulation in controlling the timing of cell fate decisions. Such an approach would build on earlier findings of dynamic enhancer control by demonstrating that an endogenous timing enhancer could act in cis to control the delay of a cell-fate specifying gene through epigenetic chromatin regulation.
To this end we and others have generated transgenic models, in which distinguishable fluorescent proteins are separately inserted into the two endogenous copies of a cell-fate specifying gene51–53. Using this approach, we found direct evidence for a cis-acting mechanism that generates a long, multi-day delay in the activation of Bcl11b, which encodes a transcription factor essential for T-cell lineage commitment54.
Bcl11bBcl11b encodes a transcription factor that is required for the development of T cells and type 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2s) in the thymus and bone marrow, respectively41. Upon entering the thymus, T-cell progenitors progress through discrete developmental stages that are accompanied by restriction of alternative lineage potential and progenitor expansion. Switch-like expression of Bcl11b at the DN2 progenitor stage induces complete T-cell lineage commitment through the silencing of multipotency genes and restriction of alternative lineage potential55–57. Similarly, multipotent common lymphoid progenitors of the bone marrow progress through sequential stages of lineage restriction. The onset of Bcl11b expression occurs at the common helper innate lymphoid progenitor stage to induce ILC2 lineage commitment58. Thus, Bcl11b activation is carefully orchestrated during lymphocyte development to properly specify T-cell and ILC2 lineages.Observations of Bcl11b activation during T-cell development reveal a strikingly long time delay incompatible with the prediction that trans-factors solely control gene activation dynamics. A collection of transcription factors known to bind and regulate Bcl11b expression are expressed in early thymic progenitors; however, the onset of Bcl11b expression occurs only after a multi-day time delay after entry into the subsequent DN2 stage59,60. This delay suggests that the levels of trans-factors are not sufficient to explain the delay in Bcl11b activation, and that a cis-acting epigenetic mechanism may contribute. Indeed, the Bcl11b locus undergoes dramatic changes in chromatin state and conformation during activation, including changes in nuclear positioning, DNA methylation, histone modifications, and long-range chromatin looping interactions61–63.To determine if these epigenetic mechanisms contribute to timing of Bcl11b activation, the locus was studied using the dual-color biallelic reporter approach described above (Figure 4A). By separately tracking expression of each Bcl11b allele in single cells using live imaging, it was revealed that each allele turns on independently during T-cell development, with one allele frequently activating multiple days and cell divisions before another51. Activation occurred with equal probabilities per unit time for the two alleles, consistent with Bcl11b activation timing being controlled by a stochastic, rate-limiting step that is regulated in cis. These findings suggest the presence of rate-limiting epigenetic regulation at the locus consistent with a timing enhancer mechanism.Previous studies had identified a putative enhancer that lies 850 kb downstream of Bcl11b59. To determine whether this enhancer is involved in regulating Bcl11b activation timing, we deleted it from a single allele in the dual-allele reporter model51 (Figure 4B, left). Mice harboring this single-allele enhancer deletion displayed a reduced fraction of DN2 progenitors expressing the mutated allele while expression of the wild-type allele remained unaffected. However, the majority of cells at later stages of thymocyte development not only expressed the deleted-enhancer allele but expressed it at levels that were indistinguishable from that of the wild-type allele, suggesting that this enhancer controls the timing of Bcl11b expression, rather than its expression magnitude.To characterize this element as a bona fide timing enhancer, DN2 progenitors mono-allellically expressing the wild-type allele but not yet expressing the enhancer-deleted allele were sorted and re-cultured in vitro to compare the time delay to that of a wild-type allele51 (Figure 4B, right). These mono-allelically expressing cells necessarily express the required trans-factors at levels sufficient for activation. They thus provide an excellent way to isolate and characterize the rate-limiting epigenetic step at inactive alleles independently of events occurring in trans51,64. Consistent with predictions made for a timing enhancer, the enhancer-deleted allele switched to an active state more slowly than the wild-type allele. Furthermore, when bi-allelically expressing DN2 progenitors were re-cultured in vitro, the maintenance and amplitude of expression from the deleted-enhancer allele was identical to that of the wild-type allele. This suggests that the enhancer functions to accelerate initiation of Bcl11b expression, but is not required for its maintenance.Due to its ability to regulate the timing of Bcl11b activation independently of expression magnitude, the Bcl11b timing enhancer enabled investigation of the functional impact of altered timing control during lymphocyte development. How does altering the timing of Bcl11b activation affect T cell and ILC2 production in vivo? Mice with the timing enhancer removed from both Bcl11b alleles have roughly half the total number of ILC2 cells compared to wild-type mice41. Similarly, mice lacking the Bcl11b timing enhancer have a reduced number of thymocytes (Pease et al. unpublished), indicating that proper control of Bcl11b activation timing is important for specifying T-cell population sizes.Collectively, these findings provide evidence for an endogenous enhancer that behaves according to the predictions of the timing enhancer model. It controls gene expression primarily through alterations of cell fractions, without affecting expression magnitude. It appears to alter gene expression by altering the onset of stochastic switching between heritable chromatin states. It is able to explain how time delays over long timescales could be controlled where a trans-factor model is insufficient. Finally, perturbations of this enhancer alter immune cell output according to the predictions of a timing enhancer mechanism.Based on their ability to alter gene expression kinetics and cell population fractions without altering magnitude, we argue that timing enhancers are prevalent throughout lymphocyte development and differentiation. However, few studies have perturbed endogenous regulatory elements and tracked their effects in cis as has been done for Bcl11b. Therefore, based on the insights that we have gained above, we define a list of distinguishing functional features to identify putative timing enhancers in the lymphocyte literature:Timing enhancers, when disrupted, primarily lead to changes in the fraction of cells that express their target genes in an all-or-none fashion. In contrast, perturbations to amplitude enhancers change the expression magnitude of their target genes.Timing enhancers are important for controlling the kinetics of gene activation, but are usually dispensable for maintaining expression once the gene has been turned on; however, there are notable exceptions where an enhancer can have both timing and amplitude control functions, or may also be required for preventing locus re-silencing caused by heterochromatin spreading20,65.Gene expression states established by timing enhancers are stable over time, and can be inherited through cell division. This property links timing enhancers to stable chromatin modifications associated with epigenetic states, such as DNA methylation or histone H3K27-trimethylation. However, the existence of these chromatin modifications does not necessarily imply heritability or timing enhancer action.
Evidence for generalityAs mentioned previously, the strongest evidence for timing enhancers comes from studies that resolve gene expression at the single-cell and single-allele level. Across studies that have perturbed endogenous cis-elements and made single-cell measurements, there are a number of examples that are most consistent with the predictions of a timing enhancer mechanism. Many of these examples come from immunology, where extensive single-cell analysis by flow cytometry has enabled these observations. We note, however, that timing enhancers have been proposed to function across a range of developmental processes. For example, the MyoD “core enhancer” regulates the timing of MyoD expression in muscle lineages during embryonic development 66. Removal of this timing enhancer delays the onset of MyoD expression and myocyte differentiation for about two days. Similarly, enhancers at the Hoxc8 and Hoxd11 loci regulate the onset of their expression during embryonic development, but have no effect on the expression levels67–69. Removing the timing enhancer at the Hoxc8 locus results in morphological changes to the axial skeleton whereas mutations in the Hoxd11 timing enhancer result in premature Hoxd11 expression and an anterior shift of vertebrae68. While many of these studies lack single-cell resolution of expression states, they provide evidence that timing enhancers are pervasive throughout development and are important for shaping tissue size and composition.Below, we provide examples from lymphocyte development and differentiation that show some of the strongest evidence for timing enhancers. Flow cytometry shows how perturbation of these cis-elements can primarily affect population fractions without altering magnitude, a key prediction of a timing enhancer mechanism. A few studies provide evidence for additional predictions of a timing enhancer mechanism such as: 1) an involvement with initiation but not maintenance, 2) a change in heritable gene activation states, and 3) an involvement of chromatin modifications associated with heritable gene activation states (e.g. DNA methylation or H3K27me3). We also discuss potential functions of these timing enhancers. In addition to these examples, we also provide a more comprehensive list of candidate timing enhancers that we have identified from the literature (Table 1).
Cd8During T-cell development, CD4-CD8- double negative (DN)3 cells productively rearrange their T-cell receptor (TCR) β-chain and proliferate for 2–4 days before entering the CD4+CD8+ double positive (DP) stage, whereupon they rearrange their TCR α-chain and undergo selection70,71. During progression from the DN to DP stage, CD4 and CD8 co-receptors must turn on in a timely manner, to ensure that cells are equipped to engage TCR signaling for productive selection.The Cd8 locus, which contains both the Cd8a and Cd8b genes, contains an intricate system of interacting cis-regulatory elements that together regulate Cd8 expression during T-cell development72. Within this system, there is evidence of multiple cis-regulatory elements that work, either singly or in combination, as timing enhancers for Cd8 activation during the DN to DP transition. In one study, combined deletion of two enhancer elements, E8I and E8II, led to a population of cells that did not activate Cd8 expression during the DN to DP transition73, resulting in a population of CD8-CD4+ single-positive cells with an immature phenotype. However, cells that did turn on Cd8 expressed it at levels similar to normal cells, consistent with a role for these two populations in controlling all-or-none Cd8 activation. In another study, deletion of the E8v enhancer also generated an immature population of Cd8 non-expressing cells, consistent with delayed Cd8 activation during the DN to DP transition74. Using mice with two different Cd8 alleles, the authors determined the expression of Cd8 with or without the enhancer deletion and further confirmed that the delay in Cd8 activation is controlled in cis. Disruption of these Cd8 enhancers reduced the fractions of CD8+ cells in both the thymus and the periphery, suggesting that control of Cd8 activation timing is important for ensuring that CD8+ cells are generated in proper numbers and fractions. Together, these studies support a view, where multiple timing enhancers collaborate to ensure proper CD8 co-receptor activation and mature CD8 T cell generation during T-cell development.
Cd4After TCR α-chain rearrangement, DP thymocytes undergo positive selection, then silence expression of either the CD4 or CD8 co-receptors to commit to the MHC-class I restricted CD8+ cytotoxic T-cell lineage or the MHC-class II restricted CD4+ helper T-cell lineage72. How DP thymocytes enter the CD4+ and CD8+ lineages in response to selection on the same co-receptors is explained by the kinetic signaling model75. According to this model, DP thymocytes reduce Cd8 expression after positive selection to enter a CD4+CD8low state. In this intermediate state, MHC-class II restricted cells maintain TCR signaling due to continued Cd4 expression, resulting in CD4+ lineage commitment. On the other hand, MHC-class I restricted cells extinguish TCR signaling due to the decrease in Cd8 expression. TCR signal extinction leads to Cd4 silencing, Cd8 re-activation, and CD8+ lineage commitment. Implicit in this model is a requirement for proper timing of lineage choice: to prevent spurious commitment in response to transient fluctuations in TCR signals, CD4+CD8low thymocytes must integrate information about TCR signal duration, such that they commit to the CD4+ (or CD8+) lineages only upon continuation (or cessation) of TCR signals of a sufficient length71.The timing of CD4 and CD8 expression during this process may be regulated by timing control cis-regulatory elements at these loci. Pioneering work by Littman and coworkers identified an intronic silencer element, termed S4, responsible for terminating Cd4 expression during CD8 lineage commitment76. Though not an enhancer, we include it in this review as it represents a paradigmatic example that can inform work in other systems. Subsequent follow-up studies showed that this silencer bears many functional characteristics of a timing control element as defined above77–79: First, deletion of the S4 silencer led to an additional population of peripheral CD8+ T cells that failed to silence Cd4 expression78. Cd4 expression levels in this cell population were similar to those in peripheral CD4+ T cells, suggesting that S4 controls the timing of probabilistic Cd4 silencing, and not its expression magnitude76,77. Second, by inducing S4 deletion before or after the silencing stage77, it was found that S4 is important for initiating Cd4 silencing during CD8+ lineage commitment, but is dispensable for maintaining a silent state after it has been established. Finally, upon S4 deletion in mature CD8+ T cells, cells maintained the Cd4-silent state over multiple cell divisions, consistent with this element inducing a switch between chromatin states that are heritable over cell division. Together, these studies suggest that S4 acts as a “timing silencer” that generates a time delay in Cd4 silencing in response to withdrawal of TCR signaling. This time delay set by S4 may ensure that cells do not spuriously commit to the CD8+ lineage when TCR signals drop transiently, but are able to effectively silence Cd4 to maintain functionality of MHC-class I restricted cells.
Foxp3The forkhead box protein P3 (FoxP3) transcription factor is essential for the development of regulatory T cells (Tregs)80,81. Foxp3 turns on in CD4+ T cells in either the thymus or the periphery to give rise to two Treg lineages with distinct functions: natural Tregs (nTregs) and induced Tregs (iTregs)80. Work from Rudensky and coworkers identified multiple cis-regulatory elements within the Foxp3 locus, in which there exists two candidate timing enhancers, CNS1 and CNS3. Deletion of the CNS3 element results in a decreased fraction of FoxP3+ Tregs in the thymus and periphery, without affecting Foxp3 expression magnitude26. This suggests that CNS3 may act as a timing enhancer to control the kinetics of Foxp3 activation in nTregs and iTregs. In contrast, CNS1 deletion has no effect on Foxp3 induction in thymic Tregs, but does affect Foxp3 activation in peripheral iTregs. Mice harboring a CNS1 deletion exhibit reduced fractions and numbers of FoxP3+ CD4+ T cells in peripheral tissues and display a wide-range of phenotypes including excessive Th2 inflammation of mucosal tissues, increased rates of embryo resorption, and spontaneous diabetes with severe insulitis82–84. These findings suggest that distinct timing enhancers at the Foxp3 gene are important for regulating the size of the Treg pool, and that their disruption alters immune homeostasis and leads to pathology.
Zbtb16The PLZF transcription factor, encoded by Zbtb16, is required for optimal development and function of natural killer T cells (NKTs)85. A careful study of the functionality of putative regulatory elements at the Zbtb16 locus identified a timing enhancer, +21/23, that controls the onset of Zbtb16 transcription during NKT development40. By measuring PLZF expression at each stage of NKT development, Bendelac and coworkers found that mice harboring a deletion of +21/23 showed reduced fractions of PLZF+ cells at the early stages of NKT development, but expressed normal levels of PLZF at later developmental stages and in mature NKT. This delay in PLZF expression caused a moderate delay in NKT development in the thymus and resulted in dramatic decreases in the number of mature NKT cells found in peripheral tissues. Interestingly, the delay in NKT development had differential effects on different NKT subtypes, with NKT2 cell numbers being unaffected by the timing enhancer deletion. This suggests that in addition to regulating the total number of NKT committed cells that emerge during development, the timing of Zbtb16 activation is also important for determining the relative proportions of NKT subtypes, possibly by altering the activation timing of downstream cell fate genes.
CytokinesAfter development and migration to peripheral tissues, CD4+ T helper (Th) cells further differentiate into Th subsets which possess distinct functional responses upon TCR stimulation. Two cytokines, encoded by IFNG/Ifng and Il4, are critical for the differentiation and functionality of the Th1 and Th2 subsets, which are responsible for orchestrating type I and II responses, respectively. Over the past decade, both the IFNG/Ifng and Il4 loci have been finely dissected to identify functional non-coding regulatory elements. Remarkably, many functionally defined elements display the hallmarks of timing enhancers. For example, when CNS-4 or CNS+20 are removed from the IFNG locus, a smaller fraction of Th1 polarized cells will express IFN-γ following stimulation; however, those cells that do activate IFNG express it at normal levels86. Similarly, when CNS-22 is removed from the Ifng locus in mice, IFN-γ expression is delayed in naive CD4+ T cells following TCR stimulation, but IFN-γ is ultimately expressed at normal levels at the single-cell level87.The Il4 locus also harbors at least two candidate timing enhancers, each of which plays a critical role in mounting proper type 2 immune responses and pathogen clearance in vivo. Deletion of the hypersensitivity site 2 (HS-2) at the Il4 locus decreases the fraction of Th2 polarized cells that express IL-4 following stimulation88. This delayed activation of Il4 does not affect the overall production of other type 2 cytokines, suggesting that this timing enhancer primarily functions by controlling the rate at which Th2 cells begin producing IL-4. In contrast, deletion of HS-V at the Il4 locus reduces the percentage of both IL-4 and IL-13 producing cells when Th2 polarized cells are stimulated89. This suggests that delay of IL-4 activation in this case may also affect Th2 polarization efficiency by reducing positive feedback signals from secreted IL-4. More recently, candidate timing enhancers have also been identified at other cytokine gene loci including Il9 and IL3/Il390,91. This suggests that timing enhancers are likely prevalent features of effector genes, and may be critical for ensuring that effector cell responses occur at proper contexts and timescales.
Mechanistic basis for timing enhancers
How do timing enhancers induce all-or-none switches in the expression states of their target gene loci that occur many hours or days after induction of upstream trans-factors? Transcription factors bind to genomic loci rapidly, within seconds, and initiation of transcription by RNA polymerase also occurs rapidly, within tens of minutes (Figure 1). Thus, transcription processes alone are unlikely to fully account for the significantly long delays associated with timing enhancer action. This disparity in timescales instead points to an involvement of chromatin mechanisms that heritably maintain silent or active states at gene loci over many cell generations.
Drawing upon literature evidence, we describe a model where genes are initially held in a stable and heritable repressed state through an epigenetic mechanism that involves repressive histone modifications. This state can switch in an all-or-none manner to an active expressing state upon prolonged exposure to enhancer-bound transcription factors (Figure 5). Because of the stability of the repressed state, trans-factors that attempt to reverse these states do so inefficiently, such that state switching occurs with only low probabilities per unit time.
We discuss this model primarily in the context of our work on understanding the timing enhancer controlling Bcl11b activation; however, the mechanisms described here are more general and likely underlie switching at other loci. We note that in order to initiate chromatin remodeling at their target gene promoters, enhancers first need to search for and establish contacts with their target genes, sometimes over very long genomic distances. Recent work has identified cohesin-mediated loop extrusion as a candidate mechanism for organizing the genome to shape enhancer-promoter interactions94 (Figure 5, top). While proper establishment of enhancer-promoter contacts is critical for any enhancer, including timing enhancers, we do not discuss recent advances in this area, and instead refer the reader to these excellent reviews11,92–96.
Maintenance of a repressive chromatin state.Prior to activation, genes must be held in a repressed state that is stable over days and persists through cell division. Two types of histone modifications, histone 3 lysine 27 trimethylation (H3K27me3) or histone 3 lysine 9 di/tri-methylation (H3K9me2/3)15,97–99, can give rise to repressed states that are heritable over cell division. Both histone modifications have the ability to propagate a repressed state over time and across cell division, though underlying mechanisms are not completely clear. Earlier work showed that both H3K9me2/3 or H3K27me3 methyltransferases can bind the mark they write at an allosteric site, and be induced to write the same modification in its vicinity100,101. This creates a positive feedback that can potentially underlie stability of the silent state. More recently, H3K9me2/3 and H3K27me3 were both shown to bind reader proteins that undergo liquid-liquid phase separation102–104. These phase separated droplets may generate compacted chromatin assemblies that are inaccessible to the transcriptional machinery, and can also show remarkable stability105, providing a separate mechanism to explain how repressive states can persist over time.
Disruption of a repressive chromatin state by transcription factors.To switch a gene on from a repressed state, enhancers must deliver transcription factors to the gene to reverse its stable, repressive chromatin state. Pioneer factors, a class of transcription factors that are capable of binding to repressed chromatin regions106–108, may act on timing enhancers to induce state switching (Figure 5, middle). Pioneer factors are defined by their ability to bind both nucleosomes and their cognate DNA motifs109. Upon binding, pioneer factors can open repressed chromatin, either by directly evicting nucleosomes in their vicinity, or through the recruitment of chromatin remodeling complexes110,111.While these biochemical activities facilitate the dissolution of compacted chromatin assemblies, they do not directly aid in the removal of repressive H3K27me3 modifications. One possibility is that there are separate enhancer-bound factors that serve to recruit H3K27me3 and H3K9me2/3-specific demethylases to the target gene promoter112,113 (Figure 5, middle). An alternative possibility, discussed further below, is that there is an intrinsic coupling between chromatin compaction and histone methylation, such that changes in compaction state would affect methylation activities, and vice versa. We discuss this possibility in our model below. The Bcl11b timing enhancer binds two transcription factors that have previously been shown to have pioneering functions, Gata3 and TCF-161,114. Gata factors can bind and open repressive chromatin in a variety of cell types115. Strikingly, TCF-1 also binds to H3K27me3-marked regions, and, when expressed in fibroblasts, is sufficient to open a H3K27me3 repressed chromatin region at the Bcl11b promoter to induce reprogramming to the T-cell lineage116. Similar to the timing enhancer itself, both Gata3 and TCF-1 are required for initiation of Bcl11b expression, but do not regulate Bcl11b expression magnitude, nor are they required for maintenance of expression after activation60. Furthermore, depletion of these factors in early thymic progenitors delays the onset of Bcl11b expression to a similar degree as removal of the enhancer itself, suggesting that they act through a common mechanism to antagonize the repressive chromatin at Bcl11b promoter51,60.
Generation of extended switching time delays.Transcription factors bound to timing enhancers are ultimately responsible for initiating chromatin state switches at target genes; yet, switching events occur only long after these transcription factors are up-regulated in the cell. Where is this temporal bottleneck? As transcription factors bind DNA rapidly, typically over timescales of seconds117–119, these slow, rate-limiting steps would most likely involve downstream chromatin modification or remodeling events. This view agrees with multiple studies on time courses of inducible pioneer factor binding and chromatin remodeling: upon transcription factor induction, binding sites for these factors became occupied rapidly48,113,120; however, chromatin opening events and activating histone modifications around these binding sites did not appear until hours or even days later. Similarly, when histone-modifying enzymes were inducibly targeted to genomic loci, they bound rapidly, but generated chromatin and gene expression state changes only hours to days later19,21.Bound transcription factors may initiate chromatin state changes after long delays, because they act on chromatin states that are highly stabilized and not easily altered. To better understand the biophysical basis of chromatin state stability, and to determine its impact on switching control, we developed a mathematical model for gene activation at the Bcl11b locus64. In this model, the locus is an array of nucleosomes that can either be reversibly methylated, or can associate with other nucleosomes. This nucleosomal array initially exists in a compacted, silent state, but switches into an open, extended state in response to transcription factor binding. Transcription factors associated with timing enhancers can either recruit chromatin-modifying enzymes to remove histone modifications or directly displace nucleosomes upon binding.We found that this model, where histone methylation and chromatin compaction are coupled to each other, recapitulates essential dynamic properties of timed chromatin state switching, as observed for Bcl11b and other gene loci. Gene loci switch from silent to active states in an all-or-none manner, and do so with a probabilistic time constant spanning multiple days and cell divisions. Transcription factors can tunably modulate switching times, and can do so through either demethylase recruitment or nucleosome eviction. Notably, activation time constants in our model were unaffected by changes in cell cycle speed, in agreement with experimental measurements, implying that activation time delays set by the Bcl11b enhancer are set independently from cell division. The methylation-compaction model will still need to be further tested, both for Bcl11b and in other gene regulatory systems; nonetheless, this model provides a framework that can explain, on a biophysical level, how timing enhancers may execute their function and control delays over extended timescales.If a timing enhancer functions by promoting chromatin decompaction at target genes, as predicted from the model, one would expect that removal of such a timing enhancer would increase repressive histone modifications and decrease DNA accessibility at the locus. Consistent with this idea, removal of the HS-V Il4 timing enhancer increases the repressive H3K27me3 modification at the Il4 locus121. Similarly, removal of the Il9 timing enhancer decreases the enrichment of the active H3K27Ac modification and transcription factor binding at the Il9 promoter90. In a variation of such a mechanism, removal of the putative timing enhancer at the IL3 locus results in the inability of a second IL3 enhancer to become accessible, suggesting that some timing enhancers may function by promoting chromatin state changes at additional enhancers which may themselves directly interact with the target gene promoter91.
Delayed gene activation by DNA demethylation.The chromatin decompaction mechanism, described above, can generate long, enhancer-modulated delays in gene activation; however, alternative mechanisms involving DNA demethylation may also generate delayed enhancer-mediated switches in chromatin state. DNA methylation, occurring primarily on CpG sites in the genome, is a heritable epigenetic mark associated with gene repression17,122. Its removal from gene promoters is important for gene expression. Timing enhancers could potentially drive delayed gene activation by facilitating removal of DNA methylation at gene loci. For instance, the combined E8I and E8II enhancer, which may regulate Cd8 activation timing as discussed above, may work by facilitating demethylation of the Cd8 locus123. Similarly, the E4p proximal enhancer, which regulates Cd4, also works by promoting DNA demethylation79. There are multiple candidate mechanisms through which DNA demethylation could proceed with slow kinetics at gene loci. One possibility is that removal of DNA methylation marks, as initiated by enhancers, may involve passive dilution through DNA replication124–126. In such a model, long activation delays could ensue if multiple cell divisions are needed for methylation mark levels to fall below a threshold required for gene expression. Another possibility is that DNA methylation may cooperate with repressive histone methylation marks to drive silencing, such that mechanisms involving chromatin compaction, as described above, may ultimately underlie the rate-limiting barrier to activation. Consistent with this idea, gene silencing at the Cd4 locus is enhanced by HP-178, a protein required for heterochromatin formation and gene silencing. HP-1 associates with both the maintenance DNA methyltransferase DNMT1 as well as H3K9me2/3 modifications127, and could therefore work together with these different modifications to create a chromatin barrier for activation timing control.
Timing enhancers in disease
The studies discussed suggest an importance of proper timing enhancer activity in the control of immune response kinetics and cell type proportions. Consequently, perturbations to timing enhancers, caused by genetic alterations, could disrupt immune function and lead to disease. Here, we explore specific examples where timing enhancers can be associated with immunopathological outcomes. While it is not yet established that timing contributes to disease risk, these findings point to the usefulness of viewing cis-elements through the lens of timing enhancer function.
A major finding from genome-wide association studies (GWAS) has been the identification of many disease-associated variants in putative enhancers128,129. Some of the strongest signals come from immune-related diseases, suggesting a significant role for genetic risk in immunopathology. It remains challenging to discern how enhancer-associated SNPs contribute to disease risk. While many SNPs change expression magnitude, some could act through alterations of gene expression kinetics.
IL2RAThe IL2RA locus encodes the α subunit of the IL-2 receptor, IL-2Rα, and confers the receptor with a high binding affinity for its ligand, the cytokine IL-2130. IL-2 has pleiotropic roles in the control of T-cell differentiation. It is expressed upon activation of naive CD4+ T cells and drives differentiation of Th1, Th2, and iTreg cells, while suppressing differentiation of Th17 cells. IL-2 is also required for the development of nTregs in the thymus.IL-2 binding to IL-2 receptor, mediated by IL-2Rα, is critical for development and differentiation of Tregs and contributes to suppression of autoimmunity. IL-2Rα is constitutively expressed on nTregs where it is required for survival, whereas it is induced upon activation of naive CD4+ T cells to drive differentiation of iTregs. Thus IL2RA expression is critical for producing iTregs in balance with other T-cell effectors also induced by IL-2.GWAS have identified SNPs in non-coding regions at the IL2RA locus associated with risk for several autoimmune diseases131. A CRISPR-Cas9 based activation screen revealed a stimulation-responsive intronic enhancer, named CaRE425. This locus harbors a SNP associated with increased risk for Crohn’s disease and decreased risk for type 1 diabetes (T1D). Interestingly, enhancer deletions or SNP mutations do not affect steady-state expression of Il2ra in peripheral nTreg populations. Upon in vitro stimulation of naive T cells, the authors observed a decrease in the fraction of IL2RA+ cells after one day. However, after three days, Il2ra expression fraction and magnitude reached wildtype levels, consistent with its role as a timing enhancer. Similarly, in vivo stimulation of enhancer-deleted mice revealed decreased Il2ra expression in naive CD4+ T cells upon induction, but no significant changes in steady-state Il2ra expression magnitude in either mature nTreg or iTreg populations. Together, these results suggest that CaRE4 primarily affects gene expression kinetics during the induction stage rather than gene expression magnitude at steady-state, consistent with its action as a timing enhancer to control the kinetics of Il2ra induction.Il2ra expression is critical for iTreg differentiation from naive CD4+ T cells. A delay in Il2ra induction could alter polarization towards alternative cell fates. This could lead to functional consequences if there were increased differentiation of Th17 cells, which are normally suppressed by IL-2. Th17 activity is associated with increased risk for autoimmune diseases such as Crohn’s disease. To determine the functional consequences of an Il2ra delay, the authors stimulate naive CD4+ T cells in vitro and measure the resulting balance between Th17 and iTreg cells. A CaRE4 deletion results in increased polarization towards the Th17 fate under conditions of low IL-2. This may occur if a delay in Il2ra and low IL-2 frees naive CD4+ T cells to differentiate to Th17 cells, whereas high amounts of Il2ra and IL-2 would induce formation of iTregs.A more recent study tracked the occurrence of T1D in Non-obese Diabetic (NOD) mice with a CaRE4 deletion. The authors find that CarRE4 deletion protects against T1D132. The proposed model for this protection is that delayed IL2RA induction frees IL-2 for surrounding nTregs to suppress effector functions. These results suggest that subtle effects on gene expression timing, mediated through enhancer SNPs, may contribute to genetic risk for autoimmune diseases.
Lrrc32/GARPA recent study attempted to characterize an intergenic SNP associated with increased risk for asthma, T1D, allergy, and Crohn’s disease133. The SNP localizes in an enhancer region that influences expression of the Lrrc32 gene, which encodes the protein glycoprotein A repetitions predominant (GARP). GARP is a transmembrane glycoprotein that anchors TGF-β on the surface of Tregs, where its release contributes to the immunosuppressive function of Tregs134,135. Enhancer-deleted mice show decreased fractions of GARP+ Tregs in the thymus, spleen, and mesenteric lymph nodes. Notably, the magnitude of GARP expression does not appear to change, suggesting that the SNP may act through alterations of timing enhancer function. These mice proceed to develop loss in body mass, reduced colon length, and histopathologic features upon dextran sulfate sodium (DSS) induced colitis. Though a time course is needed to directly test timing enhancer function, this study suggests another case where alteration of timing enhancer function by a disease-associated SNP potentiates disease.
Beyond autoimmunityGiven the widespread involvement of the immune system throughout the body, it is possible that SNPs in timing enhancers may contribute to a wider range of diseases beyond autoimmune conditions. For example, given the increasing evidence for lymphocyte involvement in the brain, it is possible that timing enhancer SNPs could contribute to neuropsychiatric disorders136. Additionally, given the involvement of the immune system with cancer response, timing enhancers could underlie genetic predisposition to cancer or cancer immunotherapy responses137. Thus, continued study of timing enhancers may not only highlight novel mechanisms of timing in the immune system, but may also reveal insight to the contribution of genetic risk in a wide range of diseases. In general, to establish a role for SNPs in altering gene induction timing, we will need to track gene expression over time at the single-cell level. Further studies designed to detect the contribution of timing enhancers to immune function may reveal the basis by which some SNPs contribute to immunopathology.
Conclusions and future directions
An ability to regulate the timing of cell state and lineage transitions is critical for immune system development and function. By drawing upon specific examples in lymphocyte biology, we have defined a distinct class of cis-regulatory elements, termed “timing enhancers”, that can modulate the timing of gene activation over hours, days, and possibly longer timescales. Timing enhancers control the activation times of lineage-specifying genes in immune development and function26,40,51,65,78, and could consequently set the sizes and fractions of different immune cell lineages that emerge. They can also control the expression kinetics of effector genes, such as cytokines, and thereby regulate the speed and the overall strength of an immune response88,90. From these examples, we suggest that timing enhancers could be more broadly utilized to control the temporal dynamics of the immune system.
Moving forward, it will be useful to systematically identify timing enhancers in lymphocytes, and determine their roles in immune development and function. To identify candidate timing enhancers, it will be useful to know what chromatin and genome architectural features distinguish timing enhancers from other types of cis-regulatory elements. Heritable chromatin features, such as DNA methylation and histone H3K27 trimethylation, may indicate timing enhancer function, though we will need further study of the gene regulatory mechanisms operating at specific timing enhancer loci to reveal definitive distinguishing molecular features. Timing enhancers can also be identified by the effects of their disruption on gene activation and target cell population fractions. Such studies have mostly involved analysis of individual candidate elements through generation of mice with targeted enhancer deletions. Cas9-based approaches138,139, by enabling disruption of genomic elements in primary cells140,141, could enable a more high-throughput analysis. Ultimately, to conclusively demonstrate that an enhancer acts in cis to generate an activation delay, it will be necessary to make time course measurements of gene activation at the level of single alleles in single cells. The dual allelic reporter approach we used for Bcl11b could also be broadly used to reveal timing enhancer action for other genes.
Elucidating the physical basis by which timing enhancers control chromatin and gene expression will deepen our understanding of eukaryotic gene regulation and provide a basis for engineering immune gene regulatory circuits for therapy. We now have a fairly detailed parts list of genes and proteins that participate in chromatin regulation; however, it is not apparent how these parts can together implement switching dynamics over long timescales that are tunable by enhancer action. To ultimately explain these physical properties, we will need to develop physics-based models of gene activation64,142. We will then need to iteratively test these models using quantitative measurements of gene expression at the resolution of single alleles in single cells143,144. Ultimately, to elucidate the molecular basis of timing enhancer action, we will also need to resolve chromatin modifications and conformational states at the single-allele, single-cell level. Such endeavours will be aided by recent advances in super-resolution microscopy and live-cell imaging which enable simultaneous visualization of chromatin-associated proteins and the chromatin accessibility state at endogenous genomic loci145–147. Ultimately, gaining a physical understanding of gene regulation in lymphocytes and other mammalian cell types will open the door to efforts to manipulate and engineer gene regulatory circuits for cell-based therapies.
In addition to forward engineering of immune cell circuits, a timing enhancer model may allow us to make sense of the vast amounts of genetic information collected for clinical use. Millions of DNA variations occur on average between individuals, with several thousand in coding-regions and only several hundred currently clinically actionable148. Non-coding SNPs are thought to underlie the bulk of genetic risk, but much of the effort to understand them assumes an effect on gene expression magnitude149. By drawing attention to their potential effects on gene expression kinetics, one may design experiments to detect the subtle effects of many SNPs that currently escape attention. A whole new landscape of genetic risk may be revealed by viewing gene expression control with the added dimension of time.
