Examples of model fits are shown in Fig. Examples of model fits are shown in Fig. By recording from single MSTd neurons, we address three important questions. Alternatively, this finding may reflect stronger correlations among congruent cells than opposite cells (see Discussion).If significant CPs reflect a functional linkage between neurons and perception, then more sensitive neurons may show larger CPs. 6b) form a cloud of points that shows a robust negative correlation, suggesting that the difference in CP between congruent and opposite cells may be driven largely by the difference in sensitivity.How does this dependence of bimodal CPs on visual/vestibular congruency arise? 6c, black filled bars). The analyses summarized above were based on mean firing rates computed from the middle 1s of the 2s stimulus period (containing most of the velocity variation). 8c, solid curves) for all time windows. In each trial, the monkey experienced forward motion with a small leftward or rightward component, and made an eye movement to report the perceived direction (Fig 1b, Methods). Our data show clearly that slopes are increased in the combined condition for congruent cells and reduced for opposite cells (Fig. However, Fano factor does not differ substantially between congruent and opposite cells (Fig. Hence the difference in sensitivity between congruent and opposite cells arises primarily from differences in the slope of the response function, and these slope changes are well accounted for by linear weighted summation of single-cue responses. Note, however, that linear combination of perceptual estimates at the level of behavior, as often seen in human studies, does not necessarily imply linear weighted summation at the level of single neurons. Indeed, congruent and opposite cells show comparable linear summation (Fig. 5c), but this produces greater sensitivity for congruent cells and poorer sensitivity for opposite cells. Our current findings show that this relationship holds for both congruent and opposite cells (Suppl. When CPs have been observed previously34,36,38–42, this is the relationship typically seen—stronger firing when the animal reports a preferred stimulus for the neuron. Thus, one possible explanation for our findings is that responses of opposite cells in the visual condition are decoded with respect to their vestibular preference. We initially trained animals to discriminate heading based solely on vestibular cues, and subsequently added the random-dot stimuli and gradually increased motion coherence until thresholds in the combined condition were reduced relative to the vestibular condition. We examined this possibility by computing noise correlations between single-unit and multi-unit activity recorded from the same electrode, as these noise correlations have been reported to be predictive of significant CPs39. Future experiments can probe for causal links between MSTd neurons and heading perception during cue integration and can test whether neurons change their weighting of visual and vestibular cues dynamically as the reliability of cues varies. In each trial, the monkey experienced forward motion with a small leftward or rightward component (angle α, Fig 1a). At the end of the 2s trial, the fixation spot disappeared, two choice targets appeared, and the monkey made a saccade to one of the targets to report his perceived motion as leftward or rightward relative to straight ahead (Fig. All animal procedures were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Washington University and were in accordance with National Institutes of Health guidelines.The experiment consisted of three randomly-interleaved stimulus conditions: (1) In the Vestibular condition, the monkey was translated by the motion platform while fixating a head-fixed target on a blank screen. Note that CI reflects both the congruency of tuning and the steepness of the slopes of the tuning curves around straight ahead. CI was considered to be significantly different from zero when both of the constituent R values were significant (p < 0.05). 2e, compare black triangles to white circles and gray squares). 2c), opposite cells typically became less sensitive (Fig. 