Children who do not stutter (26.87%) were more than four times as likely to be found in the average social grouping than were children who stutter (6.25%). In each of these three analyses, one cell had n < 5. In each of these three analyses, one cell had n < 5. Of the trends noted, chi-square tests on the number of children in each category showed that the only significant difference was between the number of children who stutter and the number of children who do not stutter in the bully victim category (χ2 (1) = 10.80, p < .001).To summarize, children who stutter are more likely to be bully victims and to seek help. It was expected that there would be a significant positive correlation between the ‘liked most’ nominations and behavioural categories such as leader and co-operative and between the ‘liked least’ nominations and the negative behavioural categories of disruptive, seeks help and bully. Similarly for the social status ‘rejected’, there was a child with a severe stutter (14.5 words per minute) and another with a mild stutter (2.5 words per minute). Howarth (1987) suggested that pupils reflect teacher attitudes, and this, combined with direct contact, is the most effective way of improving attitude among pupils. These views in society at large do not appear to be reflected in the judgments of children who stutter by their classmates in this study.Children in this study were allocated to social status groups derived from the nominations of their peers. However, children who stutter were seen as more co-operative than children who do not stutter.The lack of significant differences between the two experimental groups with regard to classifications to behavioural categories may be a function of the small number of children who stutter in the study. The findings of this study have further implications for clinicians and teachers. Specific social skills training and advice on how to cope with teasing and bullying could assist children who stutter in avoiding exclusion from normal social interaction. Schemes such as the DFE Sheffield Anti-Bullying Project have demonstrated that incidences of bullying can be reduced by implementing whole-school anti-bullying polices, environmental improvements and individual work with bullies and victims. Of the 205 respondents that indicated they were bullied at school, 6% reported that the bullying had a long-term effect on their fluency. Around one in a hundred of the adult population persist in their stuttering (Andrews & Harris, 1964; Bloodstein, 1987). The study examined 197 third-grade (8–9 years) public school students, of whom 36 had been diagnosed with moderate or severe speech dysfluency. The results from the teachers corroborated the findings of the peers. The above methods used for investigating sociodynamics that have been reviewed have inherent problems and limitations, and contradictory findings have been reported. The schools were located in rural, suburban and urban areas across England (details of the individual schools are indicated in Table 1). They examined low peer acceptance or peer rejection and their influence on later personal adjustment problems such as depression and early school dropout. Kendall's coefficient of concordance between the two judges was significant – Kendall's W χ2(2) = 29.27, p < .05. Those that were registered were at level one or two of assessment. 