Supratentorial lesions are most common, but the basal ganglia, brainstem, and cerebellum can be involved. Because of its predilection for the basal ganglia, movement disorders are not uncommon. LP is often contraindicated because of the mass effect, and the CSF profile is nonspecific. Serum Toxoplasma IgG is usually positive but can be falsely negative, while the CSF PCR has a low sensitivity but is helpful if it is positive. If none are seen, brain biopsy should be considered to evaluate for primary CNS lymphoma.PRIMARY CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM LYMPHOMA.The clinical and radiographic presentation of primary CNS lymphoma is similar to that of CNS toxoplasmosis. A positive CSF varicella-zoster virus PCR or IgM antibody confirms the diagnosis. Alternatively, the recovering immune system can mount a marked response to persistent antigens remaining after a previously treated opportunistic infection, resulting in recurrence or progression of symptoms, a scenario known as paradoxical IRIS. This may be due to the effects of chronic systemic inflammation that occurs despite optimal virologic suppression, long-term ART toxicity, lifestyle factors, or a combination of these factors.91 Neurologists should be aware of this phenomenon as neurologic diseases of older age may occur a decade or more earlier in people with long-standing HIV infection. Finally, several current areas of research, including strategies to prevent the chronic inflammation associated with HIV infection and strategies to cure HIV, may directly impact the incidence of neurologic complications of HIV. Because most ART-experienced individuals with HAND exhibit stable levels of impairment, any significant changes in cognition should be reevaluated for other causes, such as new-onset thyroid dysfunction or subclinical cerebrovascular disease, especially in older people.Currently no specific treatments for HAND exist, but they are urgently needed because even mild stages of HAND are associated with reduced quality of life and lower rates of ART adherence.38 A 2017 24-week randomized controlled trial in 45 people with HAND found paroxetine improved a summary neurocognitive performance measure.39 A trial of intranasal insulin is also ongoing after several studies revealed that insulin resistance, insulinlike growth factor, and soluble insulin receptor levels correlated with HAND.40,41 Cell culture data demonstrating a neuroprotective effect of insulin treatment provide further hope that it may have utility in HAND.42 Finally, maraviroc, a chemokine receptor CCR5 antagonist used to treat HIV infection, has shown neuroprotective effects in primate models of HIV,43 and its addition to standard ART regimens has been associated with improved neurocognitive performance in small pilot studies.44,45 A larger study of maraviroc intensification is ongoing. These complications can affect any part of the neuraxis and stem primarily from four mechanisms: (1) direct effects of HIV (eg, neurocognitive impairment), (2) immunocompromise secondary to uncontrolled HIV infection (eg, opportunistic infections), (3) aberrant immune responses in the setting of ART initiation (eg, immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome [IRIS]), and (4) adverse effects of ART (eg, peripheral neuropathy). Lumbar puncture (LP) usually reveals a lymphocytic pleocytosis and elevated protein but negative bacterial culture and viral polymerase chain reactions (PCRs). Therefore, it is important that neurologists are familiar with the differential diagnosis and treatment of neurologic complications of HIV when confronted with either the ART-experienced patient with well-controlled HIV infection or the patient with newly diagnosed HIV infection with significant immunocompromise who is ART naïve. It often initially presents as a slowly progressive nonspecific headache with or without fever. Recommended antimicrobial therapy consists of induction with IV amphotericin B (0.7 mg/kg/d to 1.0 mg/kg/d) and oral flucytosine (25 mg/kg every 6 hours) for 2 weeks or until the CSF is sterile, whichever is later. 