As a control for our experiments, we constructed an LC3 transcript in which the ARM was mutated with an arginine to glutamine (LC3-R/Q) substitution that neutralized the positive charge, and that greatly reduced ARE binding activity. The mutant LC3 protein was stable and formed a doublet at 16kDa, but it appeared somewhat different from the WT protein in that the upper band was more intense than the lower band and it was also shifted slightly downward. The pCR3-LC3 expression plasmid was kindly supplied by Dr. J. Hammarback, Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, Wake Forest (Bowman Gray) School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC, and was generated and characterized as previously described (Mann and Hammarback, 1994). The polyclonal antibodies to LC3 were either supplied by J. Hammarback or made to the same N-terminal sequence by AnaSpec Inc. (San Jose, CA). 18-mer RNA oligonucleotides containing either the wild type consensus sequence in bold (ACCUGUUAUUUAUCAAUU) of the AU-rich element (ARE) of the FN mRNA, or the non-ARE irrelevant consensus sequence (AGAGCGGGAGGGAGU), were synthesized by Stanford Protein and Nucleic Acid Biotechnology Facility, Stanford University (Stanford, CA). Antifade reagent was purchased from Molecular Probes Inc. (Eugene, OR). An ARE deletion clone was generated within the pENTR/3′UTR using QuickChange Mutangenesis Kit (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA). Ten μg of empty vector (pCR3), wild type pCR3-LC3 (LC3-WT) plasmid or mutant pCR3-LC3/R68-70Q (LC3-R/Q), plasmid, were used to transfect each dish for 3 h using SuperFect or FuGENE transfection reagent, according to manufacturer’s instructions. The media were changed every two days with gradually increasing concentrations of G418 up to 800 μg/ml. To determine the role of the ARE in the FN 3′UTR, transient transfections were carried out using the wild type and mutant rat FN constructs described above. Protein extracts (20 μg) in Laemmli sample buffer (5% β-mercaptoethanol, 2% SDS, 10% glycerol, 62.5 mM TRIS-HCl pH 6.8) were separated on a 4–12% Bis-Tris gel (Novex) and transferred to a nylon membrane (Invitrogen). Quantitative RT-PCR reactions were carried out in 384-well plates in a 20 μl volume containing 4 μl of cDNA, 5 μl of water, 1 μl of TaqMAN probe and 10 μl super master mix buffer (ABI, Foster City, CA). To establish that LC3-ARE binding can mediate enhanced FN mRNA translation in these cells, we constructed vectors encoding the wild-type LC3 (LC3-WT), and a mutant form of LC3, in which triple arginine motif of the ARM was replaced with glutamine, thus abolishing the positive charge of the ARM (LC3-R/Q). A total of 60 μg of cytoplasmic extracts were incubated for 30 minutes in a binding reaction containing γ-32P–labeled single-stranded oligonucleotides with the FN ARE sequence (ACCUGUUAUUUAUCAAUU), 100 mM KCl, 20 mM HEPES, 0.2 mM EDTA, 0.5 mM DTT, 20% glycerol, 500 ng of salmon sperm and 0.01 units of Poly (dI-dC). Cells in five random fields in each well were counted, and the mean value was calculated. The membrane has a thin layer of GFR Matrigel matrix that serves as a reconstituted basement membrane in vitro. The membrane has a thin layer of GFR Matrigel matrix that serves as a reconstituted basement membrane in vitro. Equal numbers of BD BioCoat Control Inserts (without the GFR Matrigel coating) were included as controls. Equal numbers of BD BioCoat Control Inserts (without the GFR Matrigel coating) were included as controls. Control and empty spots on the arrays were not included for the analysis, as well as those spots flagged as bad spots due to technical errors. Immunofluorescence was detected using goat anti-rabbit Alexa Fluor® 488 nm and goat anti-mouse Alexa Fluor® 594 nm secondary antibodies (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR, USA) and slides were mounted using SlowFade® anti-fade with DAPI (Molecular Probes). The binding (indicated by the arrow) is specific, as it was competed completely by excess of unlabeled FN ARE (LC3-WT+cold probe) and much less well by an oligonucleotide without the consensus ARE (LC3-WT+irrelevant probe). Similar results were observed using multiple clones (data not shown). 4C, 4D) and also without serum (data not shown). 