These enzymes act in a sequential manner to activate and transfer ubiquitin to its substrate55 (Box 2, Fig. This is carried out by an E2 heterodimer, Ubc13-Mms2, in complex with another RING-domain containing E3 ligase known as Rad5 in S. cerevisiae34. This is carried out by an E2 heterodimer, Ubc13-Mms2, in complex with another RING-domain containing E3 ligase known as Rad5 in S. cerevisiae34. In humans, K63-linked polyubiquitination of PCNA appears to involve two E3 ubiquitin ligases, HLTF (helicase-like transcription factor)40,43 and SHPRH (SNF2 histone linker PHD RING helicase)41,42. Moreover, overexpression of either protein in human cells leads to increased PCNA polyubiquitination in vivo40,42,43. Indeed, overexpression of HLTF or SHPRH together with the E2, Ubc13-Mms2, leads to more efficient polyubiquitination43. The idea that SHPRH and HLTF might have other functions is consistent with the structure of these proteins, which is more complex than a simple RING-finger-containing protein (Fig. Whether any or all of these helicase activities are important for DNA damage tolerance and whether HLTF and SHPRH also have helicase activity is not yet clear. A PHD (plant homeodomain) finger motif found in SHPRH has been shown to recognize specific methyl-lysine residues in histone tails as well phosphoinositides71. Moreover, when ssDNA formation at the fork is blocked by preventing helicase-polymerase uncoupling, PCNA ubiquitination does not occur36. Based on this and other observations, the interaction between Rad5 and Rad18 has been hypothesized to coordinate the switch from mono- to polyubiquitination of PCNA through a physical coupling of the two sets of ubiquitin enzymes56. Despite similarities in the structure of the activating signal, ATR function is not required for PCNA ubiquitination in yeast32,74 or Xenopus laevis35,36 and most studies in human cells are consistent with this idea44,51,81. It is also worth noting that Rad1885 and possibly also HLTF and SHPRH may be substrates of the checkpoint kinases. In contrast, the lesion is avoided during template switching by using an alternate (undamaged) DNA template, and as such this process is error-free. The trimeric nature of this protein raises the possibility that each of the three subunits could undergo a different modification to coordinate processive DNA replication, translesion synthesis, and template switching. The E3 completes the transfer of ubiquitin to its designated substrate; conjugation occurs by formation of an isopeptide bond between the C-terminal glycine residue of ubiquitin and the ε-amino group of a lysine residue on the target protein. In addition, polyubiquitin chains can be heterogeneous, containing mixed linkages and of varying lengths, adding to the complexity and diversity of ubiquitin-mediated signaling87. Conjugation of other protein modifiers such as SUMO occurs in a manner analogous to that of ubiquitin86. Evolutionarily speaking, mutagenesis is the mechanism through which natural selection acts, and it is the basis for adaptation and species diversification. Of particular importance is the sequential manner in which PCNA ubiquitination occurs. Importantly, PCNA is polyubiquitinated through K63-linked chains22,34,43, and neither mono- nor polyubiquitination of PCNA appears to promote its degradation. Polκ has also been shown to interact with Rad1844, indicating that this may also be a more general mechanism. Thus, there may be at least three binding interactions that regulate TLS recruitment to stalled forks (Fig. One possibility is that the polyubiquitin chains prevent TLS. The ubiquitination of PCNA requires the proper coordination and assembly of a number of enzymes. 