Lipids with a cylindrical shape, like phosphatidylcholine, PG, and PS, have a head-group cross-sectional area comparable to that of the acyl chains and spontaneously form bilayers. parallel, liposomes were thawed at room temperature and subsequently homogenized by 11 extrusions through a 400-nm polycarbonate filter (Avestin Europe GMBH, Germany). Proteo-liposomes were suspended in 10 mM potassium-phosphate plus 100 mM potassium-acetate (pH 6.0), snap frozen, and stored in liquid nitrogen. Lipids with a cone shape, like phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) and phosphatidic acid, have a head-group cross-sectional area that is smaller than that of the acyl chain area. The lateral pressure profile is also affected by the acyl chain length and degree of unsaturation, and charge of the head-groups [14]. Hence, we started with a mixture of 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoserine (POPS), 1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoglycerol (POPG), 1palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphoethanola-mine (POPE), and POPC (17.5 mol% each) plus 30 mol% ergosterol (Figure 2(d), #1) and used that to benchmark the activity of Lyp1 in vesicles against the effects of phospholipids and sterols. We determined the PE dependence of Lyp1 by increasing the fraction of POPE at the expense of POPC (Figure 3(b)). Next, we titrated in DOPE at the expense of POPE to gradually increase the degree of acyl chain unsaturation (Figure 3(d)). We increased the fraction of ergosterol at the expense of POPC and observed an increase in activity up to 10 mol%. However, the two sterols and the mixture thereof, which together represent the functional groups of ergosterol, cannot substitute for ergosterol itself (Figure 4(b)). The resulting cell suspension was broken using a cell disrupter (Constant Cell Disruption Systems, USA) by three sequential passes operating at 39 Kpsi, after which 2 mM fresh PMSF was added. Unbroken cells were pelleted by centrifugation at 18,000 RCF for 30 min at 4 °C (Beckman centrifuge J-20-XP, Rotor JA16.250, DE). Aliquots of 2 ml were snap frozen using liquid nitrogen and stored at −80 °C until further use. 