Distribution of Sirt1 mRNA in brainIn situ hybridization histochemistry (ISHH) analyses with antisense 35S-labeled RNA probes spanning Sirt1 exons 8 and 9 sequences were performed to determine the anatomical distribution of Sirt1 mRNA in the mouse brain. We also found that Sirt1 mRNA is moderately to highly expressed in several circumventricular organs (CVOs) such as the organum vasculosum of the lamina terminalis (OVLT) (Fig. The enzymatic activity of the mammalian Sir2 ortholog (SIRT1) is not limited to histones but includes also transcription factors and cofactors that govern different biological programs (Michan and Sinclair, 2007). Here, we performed in situ hybridization histochemistry (ISHH) analyses and found that Sirt1 mRNA is widely expressed throughout the mouse neuroaxis. Importantly, Sirt1 mRNA was abundantly expressed in metabolically-relevant areas as for example the hypothalamic arcuate (ARH), ventromedial (VMH), dorsomedial (DMH), paraventricular (PVH) nuclei and the area postrema (AP) and the nucleus of the solitary tract (NTS) in the hindbrain. Moreover, the reliability of our assay is further supported by the fact that nuclei in which Sirt1 mRNA was readily detected by ISHH analysis were also found positive for the expression of this messenger RNA when independently tested by q-RTPCR (Fig. However, without direct experiments on samples from mice lacking SIRT1 in specific CNS sites we cannot conclude that the changes in p53 acetylation status we have observed are solely dependent on the activity of SIRT1. Future studies on neuron-specific, Sirt1 gene knockout mice will be necessary to assess the physiological relevance of SIRT1 in these neurons on body energy homeostasis. Mouse hypothalamic RNAs were extracted using Trizol Reagent (Invitrogen, Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA, USA). RT-PCR (One-Step RT-PCR Kit from Invitrogen) was performed using these RNAs as templates, and the following deoxy-oligonucleotides as primers: T3-SIRT1 5′ AATTAACCCTCACTAAAGGGAGActataccccatgaagtgcctc 3′ and T7-SIRT1 5′ TAATACGACTCACTATAGGGAGAgacaagacgtcatcttcagag 3′. Sense or antisense 35S-labeled RNA probes were generated by in vitro transcription with either T3 or T7 RNA polymerase, respectively. Then, sections were dehydrated in increasing concentrations of ethanol, cleared in xylenes for 15 minutes, rehydrated in decreasing concentrations of ethanol and placed in pre-warmed sodium citrate buffer (95–100ºC, pH 6). Films were developed and slices dipped in Kodak NTB autoradiographic emulsion, dried, and stored in desiccated, foil-wrapped boxes at 4ºC for 2–3 weeks. Another series was hybridized with T3-transcribed, sense 35S-labeled RNA probes as described above and used as negative control. Mice were deeply anesthetized and transcardially perfused with an artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF) solution ((in mM): 126 Sucrose, 21.4 NaHCO3, 2.5 KCl, 1.2 NaH2PO4, 1.2 MgCl2, 2.4 CaCl2, and 11 D-glucose). After reverse transcription, the cDNAs for SIRT1, POMC and GAPDH were amplified by PCR using the following primers (these pairs of primers are all designed across at least one intron allowing discrimination between genomic- and cDNA-specific amplicons. Brains were stored −80ºC until ready to cryosection. Then, sections were dehydrated and stained as follows: 75% ethanol for 1 minute, DEPC water for 30 seconds, drip thionin onto slide for 30 seconds, DEPC water for 30 seconds, 75% ethanol for 1 minute, 95% ethanol for 1 minute, 100% ethanol for 1 minute, xylenes for 10 minutes and then air dry briefly until xylenes are evaporated. 