3A).To establish the reference distribution for the mean trace density F-ST, we used a randomisation procedure. These random trace densities were then averaged to yield an estimate for the mean trace density of a random set of the same number of voxels in the same distance as the termination zone. A Z-score of 0 indicates that it is equally likely to find a higher or a lower mean trace density at that distance by chance. A positive Z-score points towards a termination zone that receives more traces than expected by chance in the same distance from the seed. Instead, it implements a reference distribution of how many trace counts could be expected by chance at a given distance and describes the observed effects relative to this reference.Consistency of these findings across subjects was then tested for by means of one-sample T-tests performed separately for each seed-target combination (p<0.001; Bonferroni-corrected for multiple comparisons). The remaining two are located in the Sylvian fissure. They predominantly follow the course of the superior longitudinal (SLF) and arcuate fascicles (AF). 1B), the other two in the Sylvian fissure. Where meaningfully possible, groups were further subdivided with respect to functional systems (e.g. 9, first two rows). 9, first two rows). A similar, though less pronounced pattern was seen for the superior parietal cortex while the anterior intraparietal sulcus (Choi et al , 2006; Scheperjans et al , 2008a,b) featured an abrupt drop in connection likelihood from the anterior PF- to the posterior PG-areas.The posterior insula (Kurth et al , 2010), in contrast, showed an increase in connection likelihood from rostral to caudal IPL seed areas. Like probabilistic tractography for fibre paths, probabilistic atlases accommodate inter-subject variability and hence allow inclusion of uncertainty estimates into the investigation. Whereas for macaques no connections between IPL and primary and secondary visual areas V1 and V2 were observed, the results of our present study suggest such fibre tracts in humans. Higher visual areas as V3 and V4 connect to caudal IPL areas in the macaque whereas in humans connections are also found with the more rostral IPL (e.g., for targets OLatSup, OLatInf). In contrast, DTI is particularly prone to false positives due to limited resolution and limited specificity. The same holds true for the extrastriate visual areas V2–V5 which in the macaque are located within the lunate sulcus and on the prelunate gyrus, bringing them close to the caudal end of the IPL (Kaas, 2006; Ungerleider and Haxby, 1994), whereas in humans these areas are located more caudo-ventrally (ventral visual stream) and caudo-dorsally (dorsal visual stream) (Amunts et al , 2000; Malikovic et al , 2007; Rottschy et al , 2007). This supported the notion of a differential involvement of IPL areas in functional cortical networks which was already assumed based on electrophysiological recordings from different parts of macaque IPL (Hyvärinen, 1982; Mountcastle et al , 1975; Seltzer and Pandya, 1984). This view is supported by human DTI studies highlighting vPMC to rostral IPL connections (Rushworth et al , 2006; Tomassini et al , 2007) and a study by Kelly et al  (2010) on resting-state co-activation pattern of Broca’s region, and more specifically by a recent macaque study of Petrides and Pandya (2009) showing differential connections from rostral IPL to different vPMC areas. Findings of bilateral or right-lateralized activations within IPL might demonstrate that functional demands and the specific experimental context might be at least as important in determining functional recruitment as the structural basis of anatomical connections.Within the language network, areas of the (left) caudal IPL, corresponding to Geschwind’s area (Geschwind, 1970), have been related to semantic and phonological processing, especially during reading (Price, 2000; Vigneau et al , 2006). Geschwind (1965,1970) not only highlighted the aspect of reading to be located within rostral parts of the angular gyrus, but furthermore stressed that this left IPL hub would integrate visual and auditory word forms to generate speech (Price, 2000). Material and methods The predominant connections to both auditory and higher visual areas in the left hemisphere, as found in the present study, might support the notion that these areas integrate these different modalities for semantic or phonological processing, independent from input modality.But the leftward asymmetry of connections of the caudal IPL areas also comprises connections to superior parietal and intraparietal areas. With the predominance of left hemispheric connections to the intraparietal and superior parietal areas found in the present study, caudal IPL area PGa might reflect the relevant part of the angular gyrus which is involved in number processing. Based on this fibre tract pattern which matches the co-activation pattern of respective functional studies (Corbetta and Shulman, 2002; Corbetta et al , 2008), it can be assumed that especially areas PFm and PGa play an important role in the ventral attention network, possibly in combination with caudal most area PGp. A scanning protocol with special focus on quality protection of the data was applied, in particular with respect to the prevention of head motion. Quality of scanning in general was checked by routinely applied phantom measurements with retrieval of signal and noise change measures within the acquired images and the background to assure stability of the scanning protocol over time. But due to a scanning protocol with focus on optimal acquisition of high quality data, only one data set had to be removed from further analysis, leaving 39 data sets which showed minimal motion and no other artefacts for consecutive analysis. The CSF-segment obtained from segmentation of the individual b = 0 images was used as exclusion mask for probabilistic tractography to avoid tracts passing through ventricles or sulci. Statistical analysisStatistical analysis was performed using MATLAB (The Math-Works). Algorithmically, voxels forming this termination zone were identified using a stepwise threshold decrease. 