Restart ImageJ after installing the plugin.NOTE: This plugin aligns images based on the “least squares congealing” principle15.Draw an ROI on the corrected full image set which spans several axons and does not extend beyond the proximal and distal boundaries of the activated fluorescence within each of the axons. 9.Photobleach correctionIn the data spreadsheet for glycolytically inhibited axons, subtract the mean fluorescence of frame 1 (the pre-activation frame) from the mean fluorescence of each frame starting at frame 3 (the first timelapse frame) for a given ROI. This mouse permits the analysis of neurofilament transport in situ using fluorescence microscopy. The total loss of fluorescent neurofilament polymer from this central window per second (dQcdt) is the sum of the losses due to fluorescent neurofilament polymers leaving in anterograde and retrograde directions, i.e. At early times, the flanking windows capture all the neurofilaments that exit the central window because these filaments do not have sufficient time to pass through the flanking windows and exit them on the other side. Normalized to the initial content of fluorescent neurofilament polymer in the central window, the rates of increase in the flanking windows become The values of νa and νr can be determined by measuring the movement of individual neurofilaments in cultured neurons, as reported previously17. As an example, we have used the first 5 minutes of data to measure the slopes for the pulse-spread data in Figure 3F. However, we cannot exclude the possibility that this discrepancy between the central and flanking slopes could also be due, at least in part, to underestimation of the extent of photobleaching (see Discussion), which would have the effect of underestimating the positive slopes in the flanking windows and overestimating the negative slope in the central window. From the rates in the flanking windows (%F0/min) and Eq. 1 above, we calculate the average net population velocity ν = 40*(0.00173–0.00108) = 0.026 μm/min, or 0.037 mm/day. We will discuss later the selection of sample sizes for experiments, however here we used one nerve in normal saline and two in inhibitory saline, due to the limitation of one acquisition field per nerve during inhibition. All methods described here have been approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of The Ohio State University. All methods described here have been approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of The Ohio State University. While it is not possible to accurately determine population means, deviations and effect sizes before experimentation, we recommend using the Cohen method21 assuming a medium effect size and an alpha of 0.05. 2.Initial assembly of nerve perfusion chamberConnect the syringe and the tubing as shown in Figure 1A, placing the outflow tube into a waste flask.Place the outer gasket into the perfusion chamber housing, ensuring that the flow inlet and outlet posts are aligned with the holes in the gasket.Lay the inner gasket (silicone, 100 µm thick) on a #1.5 circular coverslip (40 mm diameter), carefully smoothing out any wrinkles in the gasket to ensure a tight seal. We use a transgenic mouse for this purpose, but it should also be possible to express the photoactivatable protein using methods such as viral transduction or in utero electroporation. 3.Dissection and preparation of mouse tibial nerveSacrifice the animal by carbon dioxide inhalation or another institutionally approved method. 3.Dissection and preparation of mouse tibial nerveSacrifice the animal by carbon dioxide inhalation or another institutionally approved method. Moreover, radioisotopic pulse-labeling is an indirect approach that requires the injection and sacrifice of multiple animals to generate a single time course. Flip the chamber over so that the coverslip is facing down.Slowly depress the saline syringe plunger to fill the perfusion chamber. As an example, representative data were acquired at 5% laser power and 4 s exposures. For the pulse-escape method, an acquisition period of 30–150 minutes with 5 or 10 minute timelapse intervals permits analysis of the long-term pausing behavior of the filamentsSave all images acquired, as well as the ROI used for fluorescence activation.Move to a new region of the nerve and repeat steps 5.1–5.11. This z-stack acquisition is necessary to capture the maximal fluorescence across the field of view as the coverslip is rarely perfectly horizontal and the plane of fluorescein fluorescence is very narrow. Ensure that the 32-bit (float) result option is checked. Ensure that the 32-bit (float) result option is checked. Ensure that the 32-bit (float) result option is checked. 