GFP-positive clones were further subjected to Western blot analysis for MSH3 expression. Comparing G5 cells with G5 cells exposed to Dox, there was no difference in the expression levels of any of the other MMR proteins, including MLH1 (Fig. Increase in instability at certain tetranucleotide repeat markers containing [AAAG]n or [ATAG]n is frequently found in non-small cell lung (7, 8), head and neck (8), bladder (8, 9, 10), kidney (8), skin (9) and ovarian (11) cancers. As a positive control for MSH3-negativity, we stained CRCs known to be negative for MSH2 expression, because MSH3 is unstable and not detected in these tumors. According to the current model, DNA mismatch recognition is mediated by MutSα, a heterodimer of MSH2 and MSH6, or MutSβ, a heterodimer of MSH2 and MSH3 (14, 15, 16). Both MutSα and MutSβ recognize small insertion/deletion loops (IDLs) with up to 10 unpaired nucleotides (17, 18). Further studies are needed to establish the validity of this classification.Overall, our data show that loss of MSH3 is associated with instability at EMAST loci and low levels of instability at microsatellite loci with dinucleotide repeats in both cell lines and CRC tissues. HCT116 cells were grown in Dulbecco's modified Eagle medium with 10% fetal bovine serum. Mouse A9 cells containing a blasticidin resistant gene-marked human chromosome 5 (A9+5) (24) were maintained in growth medium containing 6 μg/ml blasticidin S (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). After 24 h, the cells were trypsinized, pelleted, resuspended, and plated into growth medium containing 6 μg/ml of blasticidin S. After 10 days, growing colonies were isolated, expanded and analyzed for hMSH3 expression. The gel was silver-stained with a SilverXpress kit (Invitrogen). hMSH3 cDNA was prepared by reverse transcriptase using a forward primer (5′-GACTGTTTGTTCAT GTACGC-3′) and a reverse primer (5′-ACTATCAAACACAACCTCGC-3′), and sequenced using an ABI PRISM dye terminator kit with an ABI 373 fluorescent sequencer (Applied Biosystems). Vector Construction, DNA Transfection, siRNA ExpressionThe tetracycline-regulated retroviral vector, TMP (Open Biosystems, Huntsville, AL) was used to construct a plasmid expressing siRNA against the hMSH3 message. Vector Construction, DNA Transfection, siRNA ExpressionThe tetracycline-regulated retroviral vector, TMP (Open Biosystems, Huntsville, AL) was used to construct a plasmid expressing siRNA against the hMSH3 message. The vector contains a tetracycline regulated Pol II promoter that directs expression of downstream genes including a puromycin resistance gene and GFP genes under the regulation of the transcription factor tTA. Nineteen coded oligonucleotides (5′-GCAAGGAGTTATGGATTAA-3′) in exon 23 of the hMSH3 gene (26) were inserted into the TMP vector. 