Ischemic Limb Surgery and the Intravenous (IV) Injection of Nanogels.Animal surgeries were performed following guidelines approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of The Ohio State University. The ECM degradation also releases matrix-bound angiogenic growth factors such as vascular endothelial growth factor to facilitate vessel formation.14–16 Thus, control of MMP-2 bioactivity will not only delay skeletal muscle degeneration but also promote vessel regeneration. IVIS Imaging for Tracking Nanaogels.To monitor the targeting capability of the PMNG, an in vivo imaging system (IVIS) (Lumina II, PerkinElmer) was used. Masson’s trichrome staining was used for liver, lung, and kidney.To perform immunohistochemical staining, deparaffinized tissue sections were blocked with serum and incubated with primary antibodies against F4/80, α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA), or isolectin. The calculated composition of each hydrogel was consistent with the feed ratio (Figure 1C). The TEM images of the nanogel (NG) and platelet membrane-cloaked nanogel (PMNG) confirmed the successful cloaking of the platelet membrane (Figure 2A, B). The bovine blood incubated with PBS was used as control. Nanogels can be administrated by minimally invasive intravenous (IV) injection and specifically accumulate in tissues of interest when designed to have targeting property.29,30 Nanogels based on poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (NIPAAm) and its derivatives have been widely used for drug delivery applications.31–34 These polymers are not only thermosensitive but also highly biocompatible. The cell migration was significantly increased at 24 h (p < 0.01). Notably, the liver and kidney in the PMNG/CTT group had lower fluorescence intensities than those from the healthy mice at both time points (Figure 3D). The LCSTs were lower than 37 °C before the degradation of side chain and higher than 37 °C after degradation. This led to the preservation of ECM (Figure 4), which provides three-dimensional (3D) structural support for skeletal muscle cells to proliferate and differentiate.10 The muscle regeneration can also be attributed to the accelerated angiogenesis. It is likely resulted from targeting capability of the developed nanogels. Bovine blood was purchased from Quad Five. Monomers with designated feed ratios (NIPAAm/NAS/HEMAOHB/PAA/MAPEG = 50/15/25/5/5, 50/10/25/10/5, or 45/15/25/5/10) were first dissolved in dioxane under nitrogen. BPO (0.2 mol %) was then added, and the mixture was heated at 70 °C for 20 h. Upon completion, the reaction mixture was poured into a large volume of cold hexane to precipitate the polymer. After 24 h of culture in an incubator (37 °C, 5% CO2)’ 20 μL of degradation medium was added to 200 μL of culture medium. Fabrication of Nanogels.Nanogels based on the synthesized hydrogels were fabricated following an adapted procedure.44 The hydrogel was first dissolved in THF at a concentration of 0.1% w/v. The pH sensitivity of the nanogel was tested using dynamic light scattering (DLS) (Malvern Panalytical) under pH 7.4 and 6.5, respectively. The structure of platelet membrane-coated nanogels (abbreviated as PMNG) was examined by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) (FEI Tecnai G2 Spirit TEM) after negative staining with uranyl acetate. Testing Cell Uptake of PMNG.Human cardiac microvascular endothelial cells (HMVECs) and bone marrow-derived macrophages (BMMs) were seeded onto glass slides in 24-well plates with a density of 5.0 × 104 cells/well. To image the PMNG, rhodamine-B-labeled CST was conjugated to the PMNG surface. After mixing, 300 μgCTT/mgHydrogel solution was quickly added to a mixture of THF and DPBS with constant ultrasonication for 10 min. At each time point, 1.2 mL of dialysate was collected and the same amount of fresh release medium (PBS) was added. 