Osteoblasts are responsible for the production of organic osteoid, which includes both collagen and non-collagenous proteins (NCPs). While collagen makes up approximately 90% of the ECM, NCPs are understood to be key regulators in mineralization.20–22 NCPs undergo posttranslational modifications (i.e. Free energy surfaces (FES) describing the peptide distance to the surface, and radius of gyration were used to characterize surface-bound and solution peptide structure of each system. The reweighted FES for dOC on HA shows that the adsorbed peptide has an average of 1 O-H interaction, and 2 O-Ca1+5 interactions with Glu (Figure S10) indicating the extended surface adsorption is a function of many residues on dOC interacting with the surface. This is attributed to differences in the crystalline structure of the two surfaces, which do not contain bound calcium ions, and the alternate modes by which the peptide interacts with the surface.It is important to note that while we can predict that the Ca1.5+ interactions could be underestimating the energetic impact on structure especially in solution, we see the same conformational trends in solution (albeit to a lesser degree in the case of the Ca1.5+ containing system) independent of the charge on calcium used; dOC shows little structural preference in solution whereas OC adopts a significantly compact conformation in solution (Figure S6). This minimum energy binding pose, and high affinity to interact with calcium, explains the over tenfold reduction in binding energy that was reported in Figure 5. Rather, work in this area has focused on macroscopically characterizing osteoblast affinity and function.36–38 These results, and lack of detail describing the mechanisms that govern these interactions in the literature have inspired additional molecular dynamics (MD) work in this area with the goal of gaining a more microscopic understanding of the behavior of NCPs at mineral and implant interfaces. This paper presents a comprehensive study of the behavior of the first domain of Osteocalcin interacting with different model surfaces. We predict that a fully helical structure of α−1, which was not captured in these simulations, may be partially dependent on adsorption and stability of the α−2 helix, which was also previously predicted to bind to HA experimentally.35 A single disulfide bond between the α−1 and α−2 helices would provide a significant amount of stability to the N-termini that was seen to be flexible and random coil in all simulations, prompting further investigation by simulation into more complex systems. These studies have been limited in scope, generally focused on understanding the effects of a common post translational modification phosphorylation39–41, collagen protein42, and another NCP43. Our approach applied MD simulations and the enhanced sampling method Parallel Tempering Metadynamics in the Well-Tempered Ensemble (PTMetaD-WTE) to extract energetic and structural information of the α−1 domain of carboxylated osteocalcin (OC) and the fully decarboxylated α−1 domain (dOC) adsorbed onto model basal HA (001) and neutral hydroxylated rutile (110) TiO2 surfaces at physiologically relevant pH. This ratio of phosphate groups is a close approximation of the chemistry at pH 7 (70%/30%). A 1 ns NVT simulation was then used to generate starting configurations for the enhanced sampling production runs, which were also carried out in the NVT ensemble. The potential energy was then biased with metadynamics for 10ns, to establish the well-tempered ensemble76,77 The potential energy was biased using an initial hill height of 2 kJ/mol, a bias factor of 10, and 1hill/1ps hill deposition rate, attempting replica exchange at the same pace. Systems were equilibrated using the same criteria as described above. To assess simulation convergence of all enhanced sampling simulations, free energy as a function of the biased CV was monitored over time. Binding free energies were calculated using a Boltzmann averaged difference of the Helmholtz free energy between the surface adsorbed and solution states. The free energy profiles (FEP) from the biased CVs are included in Figure S2. 