As noted above, the total number of RCTs for these interventions for AUDs remains relatively small. In addition, with regard to CRA and CM interventions, relatively little work has been done to characterize whether the positive intervention effects are actually mediated by the putative mechanisms of action (e.g., increases in alcohol-free reinforcement). As a final point, beyond existing interventions, behavioral economics may also contribute to novel treatments. The goal of this review was to provide a concise overview of the research program applying behavioral economics to understanding AUDs and to draw attention to priorities for further research. Although its provenance is different from other forms of behavioral economics that draw on cognitive psychology [6] or game theory [7], this approach has a similarly high emphasis on decision making as a critical determinant of the behavior of an individual, healthy or unhealthy. This is typically assessed using intertemporal choice tasks comprised of dichotomous choices between smaller-immediate and larger-delayed rewards (most commonly, differing monetary amounts). Thus, a prototypic DRD task item, such as $75 today versus $100 in one-week, assesses the extent to which a person is willing to give up a larger reward to receive a smaller one immediately. Much work is needed to characterize genetic influences on DRD and, ultimately, whether DRD mediates the relationship between particular genes and risk for AUDs. Clinical applications of behavioral economics have typically focused on altering the reinforcement contingencies in an individual's life to increase the value of sobriety and the costs of drinking. The longest standing reinforcement-based treatment is the Community Reinforcement Approach (CRA) [81], which attempts to restructure the environmental contingencies in a patient's life so that abstinence becomes more reinforcing than drinking. In this review, we will concisely review the application of behavioral economics to understanding the etiology and treatment of AUDs. Specifically, the CRAFT program offers strategies for changing the home environmental contingencies to positively reinforce not drinking, to not reinforce drinking, and to positively encourage the individual to seek treatment. 