Despite this similar biochemical effect, psychostimulants and antipsychotics have opposing behavioral and clinical outcomes. The importance of studying cell-type specific responses in the striatum is exemplified by our results with cocaine which provide experimental support for the classical model of the basal ganglia. In contrast to cocaine, the typical antipsychotic haloperidol can cause behavioral sedation and catalepsy18. Since T34 and T75 oppositely regulate the function of DARPP-32, namely inhibition of PP-1 or PKA, respectively2, the differential regulation of these sites by haloperidol and caffeine suggests a biochemical mechanism for the drugs’ opposing behavioral effects. Generation of tagged DARPP-32 BAC transgenic miceAll animal protocols were performed in accordance with National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and were approved by the Rockefeller University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.D1R-DARPP-32/Flag and D2R-DARPP-32/Myc BAC mice were generated according to the GENSAT bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) modification protocol35. BAC DNA from positive co-integrates was injected into pronuclei from FVB/N oocytes to generate transgenic mice.For the D2R-DARPP-32/Myc mouse, a 484bp segment of the Drd2 promoter corresponding to the region immediately adjacent to the start codon was placed 5’ to mouse DARPP-32 cDNA containing a c-terminal Myc tag (SEQKLISEEDL). Venus cDNA was excised from the vector and replaced with ECFP cDNA (Clontech). Sections were acetylated for 10 minutes and then dehydrated in a series of ethanols and incubated overnight at 55°C in a humidity chamber with 2 × 106 cpm of probe per slide mixed in hybridization buffer. The next day slides were washed 4 times in 4x SSC and incubated with RNAse A for 15 minutes at 37°C. The Myc antibody was coupled to the Dynabeads following the protocol in the product manual; 3ug of Myc antibody was added for every 5ul of magnetic beads.Following the overnight incubation, the homogenate/antibody mixture was placed on a magnetic particle concentrator (“MPC”, Invitrogen) for 2 minutes to separate the Myc magnetic beads from the Flag affinity gel. The Myc magnetic beads were washed three times in 1x PBS using the MPC to separate the beads each time. Samples were stored at −80°C until used for immunoblotting.Flag IP/homogenate mixtures were spun down for 30 seconds at 13,000 rpm and unbound supernatant was removed to a fresh tube. 1ul of this unbound supernatant was used in a BCA protein assay (Pierce) to determine protein concentration. ImmunoblottingFlag IP, Myc IP and total striatum samples were loaded onto 10.5−14% Tris-HCl gels, separated by electrophoresis and transferred to PVDF membranes. Antibody binding was revealed by HRP conjugated goat anti-rabbit or mouse IgG (1:10,000) and the ECL detection method (PerkinElmer) with Kodak BioMax film. The brains were rapidly removed and placed in ice-cold, oxygenated Krebs–HCO3− buffer (124 mM NaCl, 4 mM KCl, 26 mM NaHCO3, 1.5 mM CaCl2, 1.25 mM KH2PO4, 1.5 mM MgSO4 and 10 mM d-glucose, pH 7.4). These results confirmed that the D1R construct was expressed selectively in striatonigral neurons, whereas the D2R construct was excluded from these cells. 