Initial studies using this technique suggested that PVH OXT (OXTPVH) cells project to the NTS in rats(76). Since the PVH is the major output originating from the hypothalamus, it receives input from the majority of hypothalamic sites (ARC, VMH, DMH, etc. The PVH also receives dense innervation from forebrain regions (i.e. Additional experiments aimed to test the sufficiency of neuronal populations to drive acute changes in energy expenditure also indicate that activation of the PVH drives increased activity and energy expenditure in the mouse (34, 60, 75). thermogenesis vs. physical activity) or reflect differences between species has not yet been determined. Furthermore, recent molecular genetic tools have made it possible to elucidate the neurobiological mechanisms underlying body weight regulation. Additional studies in multiple species identified direct connections between the PVH and the IML, a region in the thoracic spinal cord important for the regulation of sympathetic output(93). It is also a complex behavior influenced and controlled by a variety of CNS sites. Additional hypothalamic sites upstream of the PVH with the capability to regulate energy expenditure include both the DMH and VMH. Thus, although human obesity resulting from disruption of leptin or LepRb (or other monogenic causes) is rare, leptin and the neural pathways it controls represent crucial players in the control of feeding and energy balance(17). Mice containing the yellow mutation of the agouti locus (Ay) are notable for the dominant inheritance of a striking yellow coat color and obesity proportional to the intensity of the coat color(5). Indeed, genetic alterations in Mc4R represent the most common monogenetic form of human obesity, underlying the phenotype of 1–2.5% of morbidly obese patients(24, 25). Initial studies aimed at characterizing the role of the PVH in energy balance control identified the PVH as the primary hypothalamic site projecting to brainstem satiety regions, such as the NTS/DMV and parabrachial nucleus (PBN)(53). For the regulation of satiety, projections from the PVH to the NTS are of particular interest, since the NTS is anatomically close to the area postrema (AP), a site adjacent to the fourth ventricle that lacks a blood brain barrier. The NTS is crucial for the satiety response that follows the ingestion of a meal, and at least part of this is conveyed via a direct glutamatergic projection to the PBN; connections to the PVH may also play a role(64) (65). Not only do a variety of single-gene mutations promote obesity in rodents, but also alterations in these genes (although generally rare) cause obesity in humans (2). The neurochemical identity of these Mc4RPVH cells has yet to be established. 