However, we found 676 genes with significant differential correlation with Smoothened in these tissues (P < 0.05, Bonferroni correction, see Methods). This relationship is supported by the observation that across the whole genome, Pten was the third-most-frequently “rewired” genes in papillomas carrying Hras mutations. Differential cancer susceptibility in dorsal and tail skinThere is considerable debate over the cellular origins of skin BCCs, with some studies favoring the interfollicular epidermis (Wong and Reiter, 2011; Youssef et al , 2010) the hair follicle bulge region (Wang et al, Cancer Cell), or both locations (Grachtchouk et al , 2011). We also present CARMEN, a user-friendly software package for network analysis. Methods such as correlation analysis that identify relationships between genes in the same compartment or across compartments in intact tissues are a useful tool to understand the interactions that underlie normal tissue homeostasis, responses to damage, and development of progressive diseases including neoplasia. Mice were housed in standard conditions, fed ad libitum, and sacrificed at 8 weeks of age. Mice were housed in standard conditions, fed ad libitum, and sacrificed at 8 weeks of age. Animals were housed and treated in accordance with the regulations and protocols stipulated by the UCSF Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC). Animals were housed and treated in accordance with the regulations and protocols stipulated by the UCSF Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC). Animals were housed and treated in accordance with the regulations and protocols stipulated by the UCSF Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC). Mice were sacrificed at 0, 2, 4, 6, 24, 48, and 72 hours, and after one week. Raw FVBBX microarray data are available for download at GEO (accession GSE52650). Statistical methodsSpearman rank correlation 5% genome-wide significance was established by permutation (Churchill and Doerge, 1994). All tail samples expressed hair-follicle-specific keratins at levels above background, consistent with follicles in tail being primarily in the anagen phase (Figure 1a, d).Expression of mitotic markers such as Aurora kinase A (Aurka) was significantly higher in tail than in dorsal telogen or anagen skin (Figure 1d), consistent with elevated proliferation rates. To test this idea, we performed an expression Quantitative Trait Locus (eQTL) study in the 89 FVBBX mice where we had both dorsal skin and tail skin from the same animal. Using matched tissues reduced non-genetic variation and provided equivalent statistical power in both conditions. Conserved and tissue-specific networks in dorsal and tail skinsSignals from the Wnt and hedgehog pathways organize the hair placode during mouse embryonic development, and Wnt activation from the dermal papillae is required for follicle down-growth and cycling (Chiang et al , 1999; Gat et al , 1998; Huelsken et al , 2001; Kishimoto et al , 2000; St-Jacques et al , 1998). Expression of the Wnt-associated transcription factor Lef1 (DasGupta and Fuchs, 1999) was modestly higher in tail skin and dorsal anagen skin than in dorsal telogen, but expression levels of the Hedgehog pathway genes Smo and Gli1 were nearly identical between these tissues (Figure 1d). We then calculated pair-wise differential correlation genome-wide and ranked each gene by the number of significant differential correlations between the two tissue conditions. The Dsk2 mutation at Krt2, a model for epidermolysis bullosa, results in hyperkeratosis in mouse footpads, ears, and tails but not dorsal skin (Fitch et al , 2003; Rentrop et al , 1987). Expression of the proliferation-associated keratins Krt6a, Krt6b, Krt16, and Krt17 increased significantly after TPA treatment, and these genes were linked to the “Skin Barrier and Cornified Envelope” module. Early differentiation markers (involucrin) increased to a peak at two hours, followed by markers of the primitive epithelium (Krt8), which increase to peak at six hours and revert to homeostatic levels by 12 hours. Markers of the cornified envelope (Sprr1b) and keratin wound response (Krt6a) increase to a peak at 12 hours and are still significantly elevated 48 hours after treatment. 