Once data files had been created and cleaned, they were imported into the HLM software39 for analyses. Although no analyses were run to compare rates in the current study with those reported in the literature, the rates found in this study (12-month turnover rate of 8% and a 24-month turnover rate of 30% for all behavioral health staff combined) appear lower than rates commonly reported in community treatment settings (30–60% per year).4,40–42 Contrary to hypotheses, no statistically significant differences were noted in rates of turnover across training conditions. The second critical gap within the literature concerns the type of staff member included as a study participant. Similarly concerning is the lack of diversity within the behavioral health workforce. Although more recent numbers for specific job types are not available, there is some evidence that the demographics of licensed psychologists have changed recently. Third, by definition as direct service providers, they are responsible for client outcomes and are at a higher risk for burnout due to regular interaction with challenging cases.28 However, this focus on direct service providers is a limitation within both the turnover literature and the training literature, given that poor organizational and administrative support is often implicated as both a predictor of greater clinician turnover16 and as a barrier to EBP implementation.3,29 As such, it is of critical importance to consider staff members other than direct service providers (e.g., supervisors, administrators), as they may experience and contribute to turnover in ways not previously explored. Although PCIT was originally developed to target externalizing behavior problems, it has been adapted to treat a variety of child mental health concerns. ProceduresAll participants completed a battery of assessments at four time points: baseline, 6- (mid), 12- (post), and 24-months. If a member of the research team learned of a staff member leaving the clinic at any point outside of the assessment windows, the team member followed up with the participant to complete the Agency Staff Change Form (described below). Participants without internet access were given the option of completing questionnaires over the phone or on paper. Participants also received bi-weekly group phone consultation for 12-months (24, 1-hour calls over 1 year). Given the problems associated with high rates of turnover, it has been the subject of a substantial body of literature, which has evolved in various ways over the past few decades. Action periods occurred between learning sessions and incorporated the use of improvement data, technology, team meetings, and conference calls to support learning. Demographic information was only collected during the baseline assessment.Agency Staff Change FormThe Agency Staff Change Form contained questions related to changes in employment. As previously mentioned, study team members also completed the form if they learned about a staff member leaving the original clinic at any point during the study outside of assessment windows. Participants rated their level of agreement with each item on a 5-point Likert-type scale (same responses as ORC). Because the SOF is geared toward clinicians, there are more items than on the ORC and seven main scales. Data AnalysesAll analyses were conducted either in Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS version 24.0)38 or in HLM, version 7.39 Turnover rates were calculated for 12 and 24 months. Clinicians (n = 100) were primarily Caucasian (91%) and female (84%) and were an average of 39 years old (SD = 10.04) at baseline. 