Macrophages are identified by their large cell size, the tendency to engulf varying amounts of lipid droplets as well as the presence of cholesterol-like crystalline inclusions (Fig. Our hypothesis is that if ATP can be delivered into the cytosol, the wound-healing process will be greatly enhanced. In this study, specially formulated and highly fusogenic small unilamellar lipid vesicles (with diameters of 120–160 nm) were used for intracellular Mg-ATP delivery. Although free ATP degrades quickly in the blood circulation, the encapsulation of drugs in the lipid vesicles can significantly extend its life.28 Our freeze-dried ATP-vesicles can be kept for 6 to 12 months without degradation. We are not sure which cells will benefit most. This period correlates with skin contraction, macrophage stimulation, fibroblast proliferation, and other fibroblast-dependant activities, such as collagen synthesis and extracellular matrix production.31 ATP-vesicles seem to benefit all of these factors during the healing process. However, angiogenesis is induced by many factors and VEGF alone is not enough. We have to point out that the use of small unilamellar vesicles is not our innovation, nor is the encapsulation of ATP into liposomes. If this approach can be translated to clinic patients, it will benefit millions of patients with diabetic wounds, pressure ulcers, and other types of acute and chronic wounds. If the full mechanism(s) is discovered by future research, it could have a major impact on medicine with great treatment potential in various human wounds. Despite thousands of remedies and dressings developed or advocated to treat chronic wounds, none has been proven effective.3 The polymerized blocks were cut at 1-micron thickness, stained with toluidine blue for light microscopy and 800 Å thickness, and collected on copper grids, stained with lead citrate and urinal acetate, before they were examined in a CM10 Philips electron microscope (North American Philips, Co., Mahwah, NJ). We have used a new intracellular ATP delivery technique in which highly fusogenic lipid vesicles (ATP-vesicles) are used to encapsulate magnesium-adenosine triphosphate (Mg-ATP). 