Thus, COUP-TFII inhibits TNFα-induced increases in NFκB1 and RelB at both the mRNA and protein levels in LCC9 cells. Future plans include dissecting the time course of COUP-TFII’s effect on mRNA and protein expression. COUP-TFII and NFκB expression are inversely correlated in breast cancer patient samplesTo examine the relationship between COUP-TFII and NFκB in breast cancer patients, publically available microarray gene expression data from 298 ERα+ patients treated with tamoxifen for 5 years was analyzed using the Spearman Rho (ρS) statistic determine if there was a correlation between COUP-TFII expression and the expression of NFκB subunits and target genes. 4) detected in LCC9 cells. It is possible that RELB, while higher in expression, might not be activated in LCC9 and thus, would not be expected to enter the nucleus. While TNFα increased NFκB1 p50 activation in MCF-7 cells, no increase was detected in LCC9 cells. Because NFκB activation results in expression of genes that lead to antiapoptotic and pro-proliferative activities, increased NFκB signaling promotes cancer cell survival (Perkins, 2007). TNFα increased Firefly luciferase activity ~10-fold (data not shown). Cotransfection with COUP-TFII decreased the TNFα-activated luciferase activity ~50%, similar to the data in Fig. Two p-RelA Ser 529 bands were detected and quantified relative to the β-actin loading control. Two p-RelA Ser 529 bands were detected and quantified relative to the β-actin loading control. 9A, white bars) exhibited a reduction in the higher range of BMS-345541 concentrations (Fig. Since COUP-TFII expression is decreased in endocrine-resistant breast cancer cells, we hypothesized COUP-TFII may play a part in the normal suppression of NFκB activity in endocrine-sensitive breast cancer cells by regulating the transcription of components of the NFκB pathway. Here we report for the first time that COUP-TFII, i.e., NR2F2 gene expression was inversely correlated with NFκB subunit genes NFKB2, REL, RELA, and RELB and NFκB target genes ICAM1, IL6, and TNFAIP3 in microarray data from 298 ERα+ breast tumors from patients treated with TAM for 5 years (Table 1). As NFκB is activated in endocrine-resistant cells, blockade of downstream NFκB target gene expression by COUP-TFII offers a possible mechanism by which COUP-TFII enables breast cancer cells to maintain endocrine sensitivity. Tumor necrosis factor α (TNFα was purchased from PeproTech (Rocky Hill, NJ). The cytosolic extract was removed and the resulting nuclear pellet was resuspended in NE buffer (10 mM Tris HCl, 150 mM KCl, 0.5 mM EDTA, 0.1% Triton-X 100, 12.5% glycerol, pH 7.9), 1 mM DTT, 1X protease and phosphatase inhibitor (Roche)), sonicated, and then sedimented by centrifugation with the resulting supernatant being the NE. Dynabeads protein A (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) were incubated with COUP-TFII antibody (Abcam, Cambridge, MA) or negative control IgG (Santa Cruz) for 30 min prior to the addition of 400 μg MCF-7 NE for 4 h at 4 °C with rotation. 