Further, follow-up analysis revealed major motor improvements in a subset of participants in whom CS was delivered in a manner consistent with the parameters found to be effective in the small clinical trials and animal studies (Levy et al , 2015; Plow et al , 2009). Until recently, CS was thought to be potentially unsafe for TBI survivors given that TBIs often result in a lower threshold for seizures. Likely in both animal and human studies what is most effective in stroke may not be so in TBI. It may be that CS treatments need to be longer, begin earlier or later after injury or may need to include aerobic or strength training. However, we have recently reported that translation of effective treatments used in animal models of stroke may not be as effective in animal models of TBI. Given the possibility that CCI resulted in an environment less supportive of experience dependent plasticity, we investigated whether behavioral treatments shown to be effective in stroke models would be as effective following CCI. While the full explanation for these findings are incomplete, these data suggest that finding viable treatments for TBI recovery may require the combination of more robust treatments to drive neural remodeling and behavioral recovery. Despite these limitations, we can still learn from stroke studies as a starting point to investigate potential effective treatments in a TBI model. We will briefly describe each technique and then describe how these neurmodulatory approaches are being tested as adjuvant treatments following stroke and TBI. Transcranial Magnetic Stimulation (TMS) uses a plastic handheld paddle that is most commonly in the shape of a figure of eight, circle, or cone. The paddle is held against the head over the target brain region. The paddle is held against the head over the target brain region. Reach training combined with 50 Hz cathodal stimulation also significantly increases reaching accuracy compared to 50 Hz bipolar, anodal or no stimulation; however, all stimulation polarities increased forelimb movement representations area, determined using intracortical microstimulation motor mapping, compared to no stimulation controls (Kleim et al , 2003). Cathodal 100 Hz CS also was not effective in severely impaired motor cortical stroke animals (Adkins et al , 2008) or following white matter ischemic lesion (Boychuk et al , 2015). 