Densitometric analysis of A11 immunoreactive oligomer specific bands was performed with NIH ImageJ version 1.34 software. One of the most potent methods to stimulate the innate immune system is via the Toll-like receptors (TLRs). The latter test was included to verify that performance on cognitive tests was not influenced by locomotor abnormalities. There are 13 distinct TLR family members currently known in mammals, of which the pathogen specificities of 10 (TLR1-9 and 11) have been identified (Crack and Bray, 2007). Although CD11b microglial expression was also found in our non-Tg animals, the staining intensity of CD11b marker was very low (data not shown). 10).In evaluating the efficacy of CpG ODN administration in AD mice model, we found that stimulation of TLR9 signaling led to a remarkable reduction of amyloid burden which was paralleled by a reduction in the numbers of activated microglia and astrocytes.Furthermore, since antigen presenting cells including microglia are activated by TLR ligands, humoral immunity to Aβ may be induced. To determine whether the CpG ODN amyloid removal effect correlated with the production of antibody, the autoantibody response toward Aβ40 and Aβ42 was assessed periodically. The phase II of trial was prematurely terminated when 6% of vaccinated patients manifested symptoms of acute meningoencephalitis (Wisniewski and Konietzko, 2008). We postulated stimulation of the innate immune system as a possible alternative method for modulating amyloid-related pathology, without associated toxicity. There was a 66% reduction in cortical amyloid burden and a 59% reduction in hippocampal amyloid burden. In the behavioral studies, we verified that any differences between the groups are not attributable to differences in locomotor activity. Our analysis of brain microglia reactivity shows a marked reduction in both the cortex and hippocampus, as assessed by CD11b and CD45 immunoreactivity, reflecting the overall reduction of the amyloid burden in the CpG ODN-treated mice. In addition, as assessed by GFAP immunoreactivity, CNS astrocytosis was also markedly reduced. In addition, as assessed by GFAP immunoreactivity, CNS astrocytosis was also markedly reduced. At later stages of AD, when penetration of CpG ODNs into the CNS may be possible, microglia may be a direct target of the treatment. These findings contrast to ours in which peripheral administration of CpG ODNs is clearly beneficial leading to reductions in both amyloid deposition and cognitive decline. Our results indicate that stimulation of the innate immune system through TLR9 with CpG ODNs is an effective and apparently nontoxic method to reduce the amyloid burden in AD model mice. Clear Plexiglas guillotine doors, operated by a remote pulley system, controlled access to the arms from a central area from which the animals entered and exited the apparatus. GFAP is a component of the glial intermediate filaments that forms part of the cytoskeleton and is found predominantly in astrocytes. Seven sections were analyzed per animal. All procedures were performed by an individual blinded to the experimental condition of the study. The cortical area was dorsomedial from the cingulate cortex and extended ventrolaterally to the rhinal fissure within the right hemisphere. The adaptive immune response, which takes time to specifically target a foreign protein and provides a memory response upon subsequent re-exposure, is mediated by the more recently evolved T and B cells. 