We treated rat hippocampal neurons with two widely used ER stress inducers: the ER-Ca2+-ATPase blocker Thapsigargin (Tg) and the N-glycosylation inhibitor Tunicamycin (Tn) (Li et al , 2000; Urano et al , 2000). For the purpose of this study, we decided to use 0.5 μM for Tg and 4 μg/ml for Tn since at these doses we observed a robust ER-stress induced UPR activation and ER-stress induced cell death of at least 50–60% neuronal cells.When assessing the effect of ER stress on the Akt/mTOR pathway, we found a response that varied with duration of treatment. While ER stress has been demonstrated in Tsc-deficient mouse embryonic fibroblasts and kidney tumors (Ozcan et al , 2008), it remains unclear whether TSC-deficiency leads to ER stress in neurons, what role mTOR pathway plays in neuronal stress response, and whether similar dysfunctions are present in seizure-models of Tsc in vivo. A 1.7 fold increase in FMI of MT-Red was found in Tsc2-Sh cultures compared to control (*p<0.05 by t-test). To investigate whether a similar inhibition was occurring in Tsc-deficient neurons, we analyzed Akt at the phospho-Ser473 activation site using western blot. To determine whether a similar stress response occurs in vivo, we assessed levels of expression for CHOP and HO-1 in total brain lysates from Tsc1c/−SynCre+ mice (neuronal Tsc1 knockout) (Meikle et al , 2007). Tsc1c/−SynCre+ mice experience near complete loss of Tsc1 expression in neurons, and display neurological decline with median survival of 35 days. Interestingly, Tsc1c/−SynCre+ mice taken off rapamycin after 3 weeks of treatment showed recurrence of HO-1 expression (Suppl. No CHOP or HO-1 staining was observed in the peri-tuber brain regions (Figure 6F) or in the brain of a non-TSC patient with focal dysplasia (Figure 6G). This is particularly important in TSC disease because the vast majority of patients experience seizures and many of the cases are medically-intractable. However, excessive HO-1 can also contribute to the increase of carbon monoxide (CO) and/or free iron levels, which can have toxic effects on mitochondrial function (Ryter and Tyrrell, 2000; Baranano and Snyder, 2001; Schipper, 2004a). TSC patients suffer from epilepsy, autism and developmental delay. The sequences of the primers for both semiquantitative and qPCRs are listed in the Supplementary Material. In all cases, data were expressed as means of at least three independent experiments +/− SE. Statistical analysis was performed by unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test and considered significant at p <0.05. Antibodies and ReagentsAntibodies used for this study included: rabbit polyclonal anti-phospho-S6 (Ser234/Ser235) (cat. 3611), (all from Cell signaling Technology); rabbit polyclonal anti-Tsc2 (sc-893), mouse monoclonal anti-GADD153 (CHOP) (cat. Stocks of drugs were made in DMSO and freshly diluted in NB media at 20x of the final concentration before performing each experiment. When included, rapamycin was used for 24hrs in NB media at a final concentration of 20nM. Neurons were then washed in PBS, mounted and analyzed with a Leica DM RXA microscope equipped with epifluorescence. Data are expressed as means from at least three different experiments +/− SE, and statistical analysis was performed by Student t-test. Statistical analysis was performed by unpaired two-tailed Student’s t-test and considered significant at p <0.05. Flow Cytometric AnalysisNeurons cultured in NB media for 24 hrs were harvested by 5min incubation at 37C with 15U/ml of papain (Worthington) made in Hank’s Balanced Salt Solution containing 10mM MgCl2, 1mM kynurenic acid, 10mM HEPES and penicillin/streptomycin. Neurons were then collected by centrifugation, washed and resuspended in NB media at 2× 106cells/ml. 