The risk of death in the cured state is obtained from standard U.S. life tables and is dependent on the patient’s age. We assumed that cancer carries an additional cancer-specific risk of death. In addition, we performed further regressions to compare the results from the PSA with the one-factor-at-a-time and full-factorial designs. For example changing the cost of chemotherapy by $1 does not have a noticeable impact on the NHB of chemotherapy. However, computing EVPI can be challenging.5 Thus, no single measure of sensitivity analyses is perfect and decision analysts often are encouraged to perform a combination of deterministic and probabilistic sensitivity analyses.6 Furthermore, if our uncertainty regarding the chance of failing chemotherapy changes from zero to one, then we expect an increase in the cost of chemotherapy by nearly $36,000, and a reduction in the benefit by 7 QALYs. The coefficients of the probabilities can be interpreted in a similar way. For example, the uncertainty in the mortality rate of cancer (μCancer) has the most important impact on the NHB of chemotherapy followed by the probability of failing chemotherapy (pFailChemo) and the cost of chemotherapy (cChemo). Notice that the main effects and the intercept are similar to Table 2. The metamodel’s intercept reproduced the base-case results extremely well confirming that the effects were locally near-linear. Obviously, the cost of chemotherapy should not have a direct impact on the choice between radiation and surgery. Sixteen scenarios were used in the metamodeling of the one-factor-at-a-time design, 256 were used in the metamodeling of the full-factorial design, and 10,000 scenarios were used in the metamodeling of the PSA design. We compared the results from the PSA design to two types of deterministic designs: a full-factorial (2K) and a one-factor-at-a-time design. However, we would argue that simplicity may outweigh detail in the current presentation of CEA results. In these fields, metamodeling is commonly used for prediction (i.e., to replace the simulation model). Although, model replacement continues to be a valid application of metamodeling, it is not the focus of our study. When the purpose of a metamodel is model replacement (e.g., to perform quick what-if scenarios and reduce computing cost), lack-of-fit statistics (e.g., F-statistics) and cross-validation methods are more popular.18,19 where ΔE and ΔC are the incremental benefit and incremental cost respectively of T1 relative to T0. All three expressions (Δθj, Δγj and Δδj/λ) are measured in units of health (e.g., quality adjusted life years, QALYs). All three expressions (Δθj, Δγj and Δδj/λ) are measured in units of health (e.g., quality adjusted life years, QALYs). Adding an interaction (cross-product) term to Equation (8), and redefining the relationship as an inequality produces: where Δθ3 is the coefficient of the interaction term z1z2. To compare K interventions, one must re-compute this constraint for all K(K − 1)/2 intervention pairs possible. If treatment fails after this period, the patient stays in the cancer state with an increased risk of death. If treatment fails after this period, the patient stays in the cancer state with an increased risk of death. 