9f), suggesting that this system could be used for scalable therapeutics discovery. 9f), suggesting that this system could be used for scalable therapeutics discovery. 4a, Extended Data Fig. Any methods, additional references, Nature Research reporting summaries, source data, extended data, supplementary information, acknowledgements, peer review information; details of author contributions and competing interests; and statements of data and code availability are available at https://doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-3014-1. Standard informed consent for research was obtained in writing from all patients who contributed to this study before tissue procurement and all experiments followed relevant guidelines and regulations. In addition, five long-term organoid cultures (2–6 months) underwent targeted next generation sequencing to exclude pathogenic nucleotide variants (see below). Principal component analysis, t-SNE, unsupervised graph-based clustering, statistical testing, and the pseudotime trajectory for all scRNA-seq analyses are described in Supplementary Methods and Supplementary Data 1. These were dissociated and subjected to droplet-based scRNA-seq with the 10× Genomics Chromium Single Cell 3′ platform v2 according to the manufacturer’s protocol. These were dissociated and subjected to droplet-based scRNA-seq with the 10× Genomics Chromium Single Cell 3′ platform v2 according to the manufacturer’s protocol. Subsequent analysis is described in Supplementary Methods and Supplementary Data 1. Histology and immunocytochemistryOrganoids were fixed with 2% paraformaldehyde at 4 °C overnight, paraffin embedded and sectioned (10–20 μm) as previously described37. Antibodies used for immunocytochemistry staining following standard staining protocols39 are listed in Supplementary Methods and images were acquired on a Leica-SP8 confocal microscope. Whole mounts were then washed with PBS-T and incubated with fluorescent secondary antibodies, phalloidin and DAPI, for 4 h at room temperature in staining buffer. 3D rendering of confocal image stacks was performed using Volocity Image Analysis software (Quorum Technologies Inc., Guelph, Ontario). 4h, which required five colours, cilia were distinguished by staining with two fluorescent secondary antibodies and merging the colocalized voxels into a pseudocoloured channel using Volocity software. Variant call files are provided in Supplementary Data 2. Organoids were centrifuged at 200g for 3 min at 4 °C and the supernatant was removed. All SARS-CoV-2 work was performed in a class II biosafety cabinet under BSL3 conditions at Stanford University. All SARS-CoV-2 work was performed in a class II biosafety cabinet under BSL3 conditions at Stanford University. All RNA samples were treated with DNase (Turbo DNA-free kit, Thermo Fisher Scientific). The Brilliant II SYBR Green QRT–PCR 1-Step Master Mix (VWR) was used to convert RNA into cDNA and to amplify specific RNA regions on the CFX96 Touch real-time PCR detection system (Bio-Rad). The Brilliant II SYBR Green QRT–PCR 1-Step Master Mix (VWR) was used to convert RNA into cDNA and to amplify specific RNA regions on the CFX96 Touch real-time PCR detection system (Bio-Rad). Live-imaging and confocal microscopy of immobilized apical-out lung organoidsLive organoids were held between two coverslips in a viewing chamber (Lab-Tek II two-chambered coverglass) and filmed using a Nikon TE2000E microscope using differential interference contrast (DIC) microscopy with a 63× objective. Statistics and reproducibilityUnless stated otherwise, all data are representative of at least two independent experiments with each independent experiment carried out using an organoid culture derived from one individual. Box plot bounds span first through third quartiles, horizontal lines represent median values, and whiskers represent data range minima or maxima or, in the case of outliers, 1.5 times the interquartile range with outliers represented by data points. Code availabilityScripts to perform analyses of scRNA-seq data are provided with this paper. b, Brightfield microscopy evaluation of required exogenous growth factors and automated organoid quantitation after day 10 of chemically defined organoid culture with specified recombinant growth factors, N = Noggin, E = EGF, W = WNT3A, R = RSPO1, n = 4 per condition, data are mean ± s.e.m., * = P < 0.05, two-tailed student’s t-test, scale bar = 500 μm. Note apical microvilli (black arrows) and lamellar bodies (red arrows); scale bar = 10 μm. b, Intracellular FACS measurement of KRT5 protein expression in Basal 1 and 2 fractions from a. c, Representative brightfield of day 14 organoid cultures from a, b. d, Quantitation of 3 independent experiments from a–c, box plot represents first quartile, median, third quartile, and whiskers represent minimum and maximum. The nucleoside analogue FdC demonstrated dose dependent activity with IC50 of 340 nM as compared to neuraminidase inhibitor zanamivir, which only impairs viral shedding but not infectivity and replication. In all panels nuclei are stained blue with DAPI, and actin microfilament organization visualized with phalloidin (green). 1q, Supplementary Data 1, Supplementary Table 3). supp methods and refs 6a, Supplementary Data 1). 