Animals were euthanized according to tumor size and by cervical dislocation. Nuclear staining was also identified in some cases (Fig. Absent or weak staining was seen in more than 95% of the normal epithelial tissues (Fig. This quantitation is based on a multiplicative score in the extent (scored 1-3) and intensity (scored 0-3) of staining, and results in scores ranging from 0 (absent) to 9 (strong, diffuse staining). As will be shown below, the S629A mutation blocks phosphorylation of GGAP2 by Akt and also significantly downregulates GTPase activity. This is consistent with the in vitro data and suggests that the S629A is acting as a dominant negative in this context as well. 4C), indicating that Akt phosphorylation of GGAP2 enhances GTP binding, presumably by downregulating the GTPase activity of the GAP domain. AKT-GGAP2 stimulates transcriptional activation of NF-κBNF-κB is a transcription factor and the promoter regions of many genes contain NF-kB binding sites. A novel group of positive regulators of the PI3-K pathway are the PIKE/GGAP2 proteins (19-26). In the presence of S629 phosphorylated GGAP2, the transcriptional activity of NK-κB is significantly increased, perhaps by direct interaction with the protein in the nucleus, or by enhancing the nuclear translocation of NF-κB or both. It has been shown that Akt may directly interact with IKK to enhance its activity (41). The GGAP2 protein is similar to PIKE-L except the N-terminal proline-rich domains due to an alternative promoter. This binding enhances Akt activation while a dominant negative form of GGAP2 decreases Akt activity. In summary, GGAP2 can promote Akt activity via direct binding with the protein, which can be modulated by GTP binding. The p50, p65, RelB and RelC expression plasmids were kindly provided by Dr. Paul Chiao from University of Texas M.D. Slides were incubated with the secondary antibody (biotinylated anti-rabbit IgG made in goat diluted 1:350 in normal goat serum, Vector laboratories) for 1 hour. Staining intensity was graded as absent (0), weak (1+), intermediate (2+) or strong (3+). The staining index for each case was then calculated by multiplying the average intensity score for the three cores by the average percentage score for the three cores, yielding a 10 point tumor staining index ranging from 0 (no staining) to 9 (extensive, strong staining) for each case. Control slides incubated with secondary antibody only showed no staining. Native HIV and E-selectin promoter driving luciferase reporter plasmids were gifts from Dr. Jing Ke from University of Texas Houston. Dpn1 enzyme was added to PCR products for 1 hour in 37°C to digest template plasmid DNA before the transformation. Incubate assay at 37°C for 14 days before the foci were stained with 0.005% Crystal Violet and counted. Incubate assay at 37°C for 14 days before the foci were stained with 0.005% Crystal Violet and counted. 