It is clear from our ath5 morpholino injections that these few growth cones are not functionally pioneers, in the sense of being necessary for later axons’ guidance. Instead, we find that far more cells must be removed to prevent retinal exit: the RGCs born by 42 hpf, the critical stage (Fig. Thus, axon-axon interactions function throughout the entire course of the retinotectal projection. Alternately, early-born RGCs may be close enough to find the optic nerve head, while later RGCs are simply too far away to sense it. This allowed us to compare the relative importance of different guidance mechanisms; we conclude that axon-axon interactions can be just as important as cell-autonomous Slit-Robo signaling. As well as showing a significant role for pioneer-follower interactions, our data suggest an even more important role for peer interactions between late retinal axons. Coronal sections through 6dpf isl2b:GFP eyes after double-staining for GFP (B, E, H) and parvalbumin (Pv;C, F, I). However, in ath5 morphants (H), central RGCs do not differentiate, although later-born RGCs in the periphery differentiate normally (arrow). (B) In ast null mutants, eight classes of errors are commonly seen, including midline crossing at the habenular and posterior commissures, and projections to the left and right telencephalon, diencephalon, ventral hindbrain (stars). In the initial frame, dorsal is up, anterior right, medial (i.e., the back of the eye) towards the viewer. Confocal imaging of a 42 hpf isl2b:gfp eye, stained with ToPro3 to label nuclei and dissected away from the embryo. The optic nerve is seen exiting the eye, and can be traced back to the RGCs. Volume reconstruction of the 42 hpf isl2b:gfp eye, stained with ToPro3, from Supplementary Movie 2. Orientation of initial frame: dorsal up, anterior left (reversed left-right from Supplementary Movie 2). We use genetic and embryological manipulations both to remove early RGCs, and to replace them with cells lacking the Robo2 guidance receptor. MO was diluted to working concentrations with 0.1% phenol red as a marker dye, and the injected bolus measured using an eyepiece micrometer. Briefly, 1-cell donor embryos were injected with 5% rhodamine dextran (10,000 MW) as a lineage marker; at 4 hpf, 20–50 cells were transplanted to the animal pole of host embryos, which were raised to 5 dpf at 28.5°C. 6, donors were nontransgenic, while hosts were brn3c:GFP embryos injected with 5ng ath5MO. Immunofluorescence and stainingFor whole-mount immunostaining, isl2b:GFP-positive larvae were fixed at 5 or 6dpf in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS overnight at 4°C, washed in PBST (PBS with 0.1% Tween-20), dehydrated through an MeOH series, stored at −20°C for >12 hours, rehydrated, washed in PBST, permeabilized with 0.1% collagenase for 1 hour at room temperature, then incubated in the following primary antibodies overnight at 4°C: rabbit anti-GFP (1:400; Invitrogen A11122), mouse anti-GFP (1:200; Chemicon MAB3580), rabbit anti-DsRed (1:200; Clontech 632496), mouse anti-parvalbumin (1:400; Chemicon MAB1572) or affinity-purified rabbit anti-Pax2a (1:300; gift of A. Picker). For cell counting, 42 hpf isl2b:gfp eyes were fixed, labeled with ToPro-3, dissected, mounted in 80% glycerol and imaged with an Olympus confocal microscope. For each chimeric larva, the presence (1 or more axons) or absence of each error was scored at 5–6 dpf by an observer blinded to genotypes, using ImageJ to examine the entire (unedited) confocal z-stack. We next injected an ath5MO dose series, monitoring RGC differentiation in live embryos from 33 to 57 hpf. In control embryos, GFP+ RGCs were always present by 33hpf. 