Their ages ranged from 21.4 to 52.2 years (individual ages are given in Table 1). Five spoke no other language beyond elementary school level, and the 3 remaining each had one other language (Welsh, Creole, and French). Each subject spoke under three feedback conditions (amplified feedback [AMP], FSF, and DAF), a normal auditory feedback condition (NAF), and two variations in rate (slow/fast), also while hearing NAF. One was connected to the feedback device; the other was connected to a DAT recorder. This was a descriptive passage with no conversation similar to those employed in other studies (Flege et al , 1995; MacKay, 1970). The subject was then instructed about which condition he or she would receive next, so that the alteration (where applicable) would not produce a surprise response that affected his or her speech. While making a judgment about each sample, they replayed the complete recording from DAT tape through a Fostex 6301B amplifier that was then heard over an RS 250-924 headset. They were played to the judges via the Fostex amplifier and RS headset.The judges were tested individually, seated in front of the computer. They passed through all six samples of the selected speaker, hearing each 20-sec sample once. The samples from English speakers were also counterbalanced with respect to which German speakers samples they were paired with across listeners, to ensure that arbitrary pairings did not affect the results. Now that these characteristics had been learned, were the judges able to rank order the accent strengths of German speakers speaking English in the experimental conditions? The rankings given to each sample were analyzed to see whether there was a significant concordance (agreement) across assessors, using Kendall’s W. The mean ranks for each of the six conditions are given in the top section of Table 3. This, in turn, suggests that rate variation is not the basis of the foreign-sounding nature of the FSF and DAF conditions. Pairwise tests showed no significant differences between the amalgamated fast and slow rate conditions and any of the remaining conditions. In the next analyses, the two rate conditions were dropped because they varied somewhat across speakers. More recent explanations have accounted for the effects of AAF without recourse to feedback monitoring and correction processes. The data are given in Table 4 in a manner equivalent to Table 3. The rankings of the conditions then present a clearer picture. This showed the same pattern of results (Kendall’s W = .0700, chi-square = 12.6, df = 3, p < .001). Pairwise tests revealed significant differences between the condition pairs NAF-DAF and AMP-DAF (critical difference, 11.8; obtained differences, 12 and 13; p < .05). Pairwise tests revealed significant differences between the condition pairs NAF-DAF and AMP-DAF (critical difference, 11.8; obtained differences, 12 and 13; p < .05). Pairwise tests revealed significant differences between the condition pairs NAF-DAF and AMP-DAF (critical difference, 11.8; obtained differences, 12 and 13; p < .05). Howell and Sackin (2000) and Howell, Rosen, Hannigan, and Rustin (2000) explained the effects of DAF and frequency-shifted feedback (FSF) as being due to degradation in performance when speaking along with concurrent separate perceptual streams. The nonsignificant differences across NAF and AAF conditions show that there is no evidence that the extent to which fluency is affected under AAF conditions does not depend on the speaker’s native language; otherwise, a significant association would have occurred. In contrast, most speakers were judged to have a noticeable accent when speaking under FSF and DAF. This can be checked in future work using speed-changing techniques (Howell et al , 1987) that produce negligible, nonvariable delays (on the order of 0.001 sec for a 10-kHz sampling rate). In addition, informal debriefing of the listeners indicated that they all considered the consonant characteristics most useful in deciding about accent, whereas vowels are most affected by AAF conditions, such as DAF (Fairbanks, 1955). The latter tasks require different cognitive-linguistic processing but the same response. The latter tasks require different cognitive-linguistic processing but the same response. Her explanation for the effects of AAF on an acquired language was that the latter needs closer monitoring. Howell et al  (2000) argued that manipulations like DAF alter the situation from one task (speaking in synchrony with production) to two tasks (production in addition to hearing an asynchronous sound). One piece of evidence for this could be the heightened activity in the anterior cingulate observed in these individuals (De Nil et al , in press). Ivry (1997) has identified the lateral part of the cerebellum as a structure that does this. The critical attribute of a governor is that it is an integral part of the machine and not a device that stands separate and independently modifies operations. In this way, the extra time allowed because of DAF-slowing allows the linguistic planning done by these separate modules to go on unaffected and be completed in the time required, even with complex words, so the plan and the executed form correspond (Howell et al , 2000). Flege et al ’s (1995) study shows that native speakers can detect accents even in individuals who learned L2 as young children (5-8 years). Such subjects were used so that they could make use of this analytical training. The changes in procedures, between training and testing, from analytical to holistic judgments and from rating to ranking meant that testing and training could not be compared directly. In her examination of the literature on other speaker groups, Borden (1979, 1980) considered that children with developing speech skills, people who are learning or have learned a second language, and dysfluent speakers do monitor auditory feedback. In this regard, the procedure paralleled, in some respects, what occurs in phonetic training. Speakers of both languages have their fluency affected by AAF (MacKay, 1970; Rouse & Tucker, 1966). 