Bax Deficiency Protects Neurons from Apoptotic Cell Death Following TBITUNEL-positive cells displaying apoptotic morphology were present in the CA1, CA3 and dentate regions of hippocampus in brains from WT and Bax null mice 24 h after TBI (Fig 2A). This increased permeability leads to the release of proteins that normally reside between the inner and outer mitochondrial membranes including cytochrome C, AIF and other pro-apoptotic proteins into the cytoplasm (for review, see Danial and Korsmeyer, 2004). Similar findings have also been reported in studies of CNS and tissue samples from human trauma victims. One such mechanism is binding of the Fas ligand to its receptor which results in activation of caspase-8, and cleavage and translocation of the pro-apoptotic protein Bid to the mitochondria. Expression of Fas ligand and activation of Fas-mediated apoptosis has been reported in both traumatic and ischemic CNS injury (Martin-Villalba, et al , 1999, Raoul, et al , 1999, Rosenbaum, et al , 2000). The unexpected finding of this study is the severe behavioral impairment of both sham-operated and injured Bax-null mice. Protein content was assayed using Bio-Rad protein assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA). Furthermore, cell death with necrotic morphology may be mediated by activation of apoptotic pathways as Fas or TNFα under certain conditions (Degterev, et al , 2005). FITC-conjugated digoxygenin antibodies were added, incubated at room temperature for 30 min and counterstained with DAPI. TUNEL positive cells with TUNEL staining restricted to the nuclei as confirmed by DAPI double staining were considered apoptotic (TUNEL positive); diffusely TUNEL-stained cells with no apoptotic morphology were excluded (Portera-Cailliau, et al , 1995). Lesion volume was then quantified as (contralateral volume − ipsilateral volume)/contralateral volume and is expressed as percent contralateral. Total brain volume was calculated by adding the ipsilateral and contralateral hemispheric volumes together and is expressed as mm3. The sections (prepared as described above) to be counted were obtained by choosing the slide having those sections with the largest contusion area (n=10–12/group). The sections (prepared as described above) to be counted were obtained by choosing the slide having those sections with the largest contusion area (n=10–12/group). Assessment of Motor Function and Morris Water Maze PerformanceAnalysis of motor function and Morris Water Maze spatial memory acquisition was performed as previously described (Sinz, et al , 1999, Whalen, et al , 1999). Performance in the Morris Water maze was quantified by measuring latency in finding the platform. Data from caspase-3 activity assay and TUNEL staining was analyzed by one-way ANOVA. Motor and Morris Water Maze data were analyzed by repeated-measures analysis of variance (RMANOVA). 