This error can come from the presence of noise in the body surface potentials not related to the underlying cardiac electrical activity (i.e. The LE was then computed as the Euclidian distance between the ECGI and recorded pacing sites. Figures contain representative data, with Tables containing the complete results available as an online supplement. Here, the ECGI electrograms using the moving average (HFR1) alone (yellow) are slightly smaller than those without filtering (blue) or using a notch filter (HFR3; orange) in the clean data.While certain HFR methods did significantly improve the correlation for both Bordeaux 1 and Utah 1 data compared to no filtering, the improvements were minimal (0.2–2.3% maximum). Variation between the activation maps on a beat-to-beat basis was also greater for the noisy Bordeaux 1 data as demonstrated by the larger standard deviation in correlation and MAE compared to the other data. However, in approximately a ¼ of the beats the activation map was changed drastically in the Noisy data, as seen in Fig. On the other hand, for the other data sets there were no substantial visual differences between the HFR filtered and the unfiltered reconstructed activation maps other than shifts in the early activated region (Fig. HFR does not impact electrogram reconstruction accuracy, but does impact post-processing to extract features such as activation times. Even a low pass filter above the line noise improved activation reconstruction accuracy, indicating the line noise does not impact activation marker placement.The moving average (HFR2) and 30 Hz low pass (HFR6) filter methods were detrimental to defining activation times for the Utah 2 data set by over-smoothing the reconstructed electrogram (Fig. C.LimitationsThe results presented should be considered in light of limitations. Furthermore, the impact of different lambda values would change with different regularization methods, e.g. There was no change for activation maps.The study was conducted in an experimental setting, and it cannot fully represent the recording environment of a clinical setting. Despite this, we expect our results are directly transferable to the clinic. The question with these later cases is how to define the isoelectric point to ensure that the optimal lambda value is chosen. An epicardial electrode sock (108 electrodes with inter-electrode spacing 9.9 ± 2.2 mm) was attached to the ventricles and bipolar pacing leads to the RV apex. The hearts were transferred to a human-shaped torso tank with 128 electrodes (inter-electrode spacing 66 ± 24 mm) embedded in the surface (Fig. The isolated, perfused heart was suspended in a human torso shaped tank with 192 electrodes (with inter-electrode spacing 40.2 ± 16.8mm) and filled with an electrolytic solution (500 Ω-cm). The epicardial, intramural, and torso tank electrodes were referenced to a Wilson’s Central Terminal and were sampled at 1000 Hz simultaneously for five seconds during RV pacing. The weight function is constant normalized by the number of samples in window.2)Pipberger’s Filter (HFR2):Also a moving average filter, suggested in [18], where the averaging window corresponds with the length of two cycles of 50 or 60 Hz (40 or 33 ms), and the summed samples are weighted by a cosine function.3)Notch Filter (HFR3):Signals were transformed into the Fourier space, and a notch filter was applied around the line frequency and its harmonics before applying the inverse Fourier transform.4)Savitzky-Golay Filter (HFR4):A Savitzky-Golay FIR smoothing filter was applied to the data using the ‘sgolayfilt’ function in MATLAB R2018a with an order of 3 and a frame length of 20 or 17 ms.5)Rational Transfer Function (HFR5):A rational transfer function (RTF) implemented using MATLAB, the default filter implemented in the open-source PFEIFER toolbox [19]. Recent clinical validation studies have also shown large variability in activation map reconstruction accuracy (correlation from −0.68 to 0.82 in one study [9], 0.29 to 0.80 in another [10]). After the forward matrix is obtained for these refined meshes, the rows corresponding to torso measurement electrodes were sampled to form a reduced forward matrix, which we denote as A in (1), relating the electrograms (in the refined epicardial meshes) to torso measurements. 