Among these, 14/18 had complete LSL excision, but 4/18 lacked excision. Germ line insertions are defined as retrotransposition events that occur in germ cells of an animal containing an activated allele of the ORFeusLSL transgene. 4b, animals H866, H868, H869, H871, and H872), and 9% (7/78) had insertion signals by intron PCR (Fig. The efficiency of Cre-mediated recombination is affected by several factors other than the promoter driving Cre expression (Sauer, 1998; Schmidt-Supprian and Rajewsky, 2007). Therefore, we set out to test CAG-cre and CMVmini-cre mouse lines on two independent ORFeusLSL target lines (2G6 and 1E2) that had identical transgene sequence at different genomic loci (Fig. Thus, our data are consistent with inefficient excision by Cre recombinase on more distantly positioned loxP sites. Thus, our data are consistent with inefficient excision by Cre recombinase on more distantly positioned loxP sites. On a different note, our study presents potential evidence that adds to the increasing literature for Cre-induced toxicity (Schmidt-Supprian and Rajewsky, 2007). Such toxicity may explain the apparently low prevalence of CAG-cre transgene among G1 progeny of heterozygous CAG-cre male parents derived from two independent ORFeusLSL lines:10/38 for line 2G6 (Fig. Nevertheless, it is noteworthy that the paternal genome may be more susceptible to Cre-mediated actions than the maternal counterpart as paternal DNA is uniquely remodeled from a nucleosome-based to a protamine-based chromatin during spermatogenesis (Kimmins and Sassone-Corsi, 2005). Nevertheless, it is noteworthy that the paternal genome may be more susceptible to Cre-mediated actions than the maternal counterpart as paternal DNA is uniquely remodeled from a nucleosome-based to a protamine-based chromatin during spermatogenesis (Kimmins and Sassone-Corsi, 2005). To make pBSsmL1glob, the β-globin polyadenylation signal was PCR amplified from the plasmid pQX107, digested with BamHI/EcoRI, and cloned into the corresponding sites of pBSsmL1 to produce pBSsmL1glob. The CAG promoter and LSL cassette from pQX107 was removed with NotI/XmnI, blunted with Klenow fragment, and cloned into the BstZ17I sites of pBSsmL1GFPuv to make ORFeusLSL, which was sequencingly verified in its entirety. Three independent ES clones with single copy trans-genes and high levels of lacZ expression were selected from 3500 ES cell clones and injected into BALB/c blastocysts, and the resulting chimeric males were mated to C57BL/6J females. To this end, we incorporated the Z/AP design (Lobe et al , 1999) by grafting the loxP-β-geo-stop-loxP (LSL) cassette described for that transgene between the CAG promoter (Niwa et al , 1991) and ORFeus coding sequences (Han and Boeke, 2004); this construct is termed ORFeusLSL (Fig. L1 replicates in the genome by retrotransposition, a copy-and-paste mechanism involving reverse transcription of an RNA intermediate. For doubly heterozygous G1 progeny of CAG-cre females, 5/12 displayed complete excision in the tail tissue examined (Fig. 2b, animals H784 and H883), 5/12 displayed a mosaic excision pattern, indicated by the presence of both floxed and excised alleles in the same tissue (Fig. Hence, the observed excision rate in doubly heterozygous G1 progeny was also much lower than that in the initial study which reported excision in 100% of such animals without mosaicism (Sakai and Miyazaki, 1997). With intron PCR, we detected intronless signal in the tail tissue of all animals that have undergone either complete (Fig. As expected, Cre-mediated excision could be detected in 3/3 pancreatic samples, 3/3 stomach samples, 2/3 duodenal samples, but none of several other tissues examined (Fig. Only the 1,370-bp intron-containing signal was detected in all tissues using the standard assay (not shown). Retrotransposition signals were detected in 3/3 pancreatic samples, 1/3 stomach and 1/3 duodenal samples but not in any other tissues examined (Fig. Thus L1 machinery is intact in somatic cells in which L1 is not normally expressed. 