The two earlier genome-wide studies for UC by Fisher et al 31 and Franke et al 32 did not report SNPs at or nearby the MEP1A locus. We cannot exclude the possibility that the MEP1A locus contains causal intronic SNPs linked to the significantly associated exonic SNPs identified in this study. Genetic association of MEP1A with IBDTo identify polymorphisms in the MEP1A gene, all 14 exons were sequenced in 24 patients: 6 patients with UC, 6 with CD (none of whom carried any of the three common CD-associated NOD2/CARD15 variants), and 12 celiac disease patients. The study presented herein is the first to report that the disruption of the meprin-α gene alone affects the severity of IBD. The healthy controls were age and sex matched and included 276 subjects randomly chosen from general practitioner clinics around Abingdon, Oxfordshire, UK, and 96 samples from the UK National Blood Transfusion Service. Ethics approval was obtained from the Central Oxford Region Ethics Committee (COREC 00.083) and written consent was obtained from all participants.dbSNP (build 129) states a total of 255 SNPs at the MEP1A locus, the large majority of which are intronic. χ2 test was used on allele frequencies data in 2×2 contingency tables. Primers 5′-CAGGTGAGTATGACTCGAGCAGAGTAGG-3′ (containing an XhoI restriction site, corresponding to exon7/intron7 junction) and 5′-GATGAGGCAGCTAGCATACTGGGATTC-3′ (encoding an NheI site and corresponding to intron 8) were used to generate a 4.9-kb amplicon from the 129×1/SvJ genomic DNA (Jackson stock no. A pairwise linkage disequilibrium analysis indicated strong linkage disequilibrium across the MEP1A gene (Supplementary Figure S1 online). Electroporation and selection of targeted embryonic stem cells and subsequent blastocyst injections were performed at the University of Michigan Transgenic Animal Facility. Ileum brush-border membrane preparationIleal samples were weighed and homogenized in 10 volumes of cold homogenization buffer (50 mm mannitol, 2 mm Tris-Cl, pH 7.0) in the presence of Complete Mini Protease Cocktail Inhibitor (Roche, Indianapolis, IN). CaCl2 was added to a final concentration of 10 mm and the homogenate stirred slowly at 4°C for 15 min. The scores of 2 and 3 were assigned based on the magnitude of weight loss accompanied with loose stool and rectal bleeding. However, the association with UC was also evident considering control allele frequencies given in these databases (P=5×10−5 and < 1×10−8 for Hapmap and dbSNP, respectively). Villin-1 displays a similar expression pattern that probably reflects a decrease in the relative number of differentiated epithelial cells in the colon. If the loss of differentiated epithelial cells was the only cause for the decreased expression of meprin-α mRNA, the meprin-α/villin-1 ratio would be expected to remain unchanged in the inflamed samples. However, a significantly decreased ratio of meprin-α to villin-1 mRNA was found in affected mucosa (Figure 2c). Targeted disruption of the Mep1a gene was achieved by inserting a neomycin cassette in exon 7, the segment that codes for the zinc-catalytic center of meprin-α (Figure 3). Targeted disruption of the Mep1a gene was achieved by inserting a neomycin cassette in exon 7, the segment that codes for the zinc-catalytic center of meprin-α (Figure 3). Immunohistochemical analysis indicated the presence of membrane-bound meprin-β subunits in the brush-border membrane of the ileum of both genotypes (Supplementary Figure S3b online). 