Just not expecting to get that type of finding, not knowing that that was possible and kind of then the initial shock of this getting information that they weren't expecting to receive. I go a little bit more into detail because beforehand, I mean – I ordered a lot of exomes and hadn't had any secondary findings. (Interviewee 6)Since it's happened, having like, “We kind of talked about a minute ago”, you know, it's more real, so not kind of brushing over things as much, and making sure you really have a good conversation on the front end that this type of thing could happen. Preparation and strategies about these concerns and how to best help patients should be considered when delivering SFs. The principal investigator of the study (CR) conducted all of the telephone interviews (n = 21), which lasted between 20 and 40 min with a mean time of 32 min. After the transcripts were returned to the study team, a member checked for accuracy by reading the transcripts and listening to the recordings (CR). All original recordings were deleted within 2 weeks after the transcription was complete.A qualitative content analysis was conducted on the transcripts. The codes were then grouped into larger descriptive categories based on similarity of the data. We then returned to the transcripts and recontextualized the data for development of categories (Miles, Huberman, & Saldaña, 2014). The researchers also used the approach of reflexivity during the data analysis to limit personal bias into the interpretation (Baillie, 2015). The researchers also used the approach of reflexivity during the data analysis to limit personal bias into the interpretation (Baillie, 2015). Demographic data on participants are summarized in Table 2. One participant stated it served as a type of ‘warning shot’. One quotation that captured this perspective is:I think having a good grasp of the family's dynamics but understanding the situation and having a lot of pre-test consent was very helpful to prepare me for discussing these results. If I hadn't met with the family previously, or if someone else had done the testing and I was just in charge of the results, it would have been much more difficult for me to gauge how they would take this. A survey of genetic counselors reported that many genetic professionals are returning SFs, and this added responsibility has increased challenges to already complex and time-consuming counseling sessions (Smith, Douglas, Braxton, & Kramer, 2015). That's one of those cases when you kind of look back and say this would be a scenario where if you had the time and they had the time that you would really do this in two visits. Maybe focusing on the diagnosis for the proband, talking briefly about the secondary finding, but then explaining that they should probably come in for a second appointment to discuss this “cause it is a completely different issue from the diagnosis”. 