Their importance for optimal immune function is underscored by the large enrichment of disease-associated polymorphisms within their sequences2. Their importance for optimal immune function is underscored by the large enrichment of disease-associated polymorphisms within their sequences2. This suggests that the enhancer functions to accelerate initiation of Bcl11b expression, but is not required for its maintenance.Due to its ability to regulate the timing of Bcl11b activation independently of expression magnitude, the Bcl11b timing enhancer enabled investigation of the functional impact of altered timing control during lymphocyte development. Similarly, mice lacking the Bcl11b timing enhancer have a reduced number of thymocytes (Pease et al  unpublished), indicating that proper control of Bcl11b activation timing is important for specifying T-cell population sizes.Collectively, these findings provide evidence for an endogenous enhancer that behaves according to the predictions of the timing enhancer model. It is able to explain how time delays over long timescales could be controlled where a trans-factor model is insufficient. Therefore, based on the insights that we have gained above, we define a list of distinguishing functional features to identify putative timing enhancers in the lymphocyte literature:Timing enhancers, when disrupted, primarily lead to changes in the fraction of cells that express their target genes in an all-or-none fashion. Though not an enhancer, we include it in this review as it represents a paradigmatic example that can inform work in other systems. Together, these studies suggest that S4 acts as a “timing silencer” that generates a time delay in Cd4 silencing in response to withdrawal of TCR signaling. This suggests that CNS3 may act as a timing enhancer to control the kinetics of Foxp3 activation in nTregs and iTregs. How do timing enhancers induce all-or-none switches in the expression states of their target gene loci that occur many hours or days after induction of upstream trans-factors? As transcription factors bind DNA rapidly, typically over timescales of seconds117–119, these slow, rate-limiting steps would most likely involve downstream chromatin modification or remodeling events. This view agrees with multiple studies on time courses of inducible pioneer factor binding and chromatin remodeling: upon transcription factor induction, binding sites for these factors became occupied rapidly48,113,120; however, chromatin opening events and activating histone modifications around these binding sites did not appear until hours or even days later. Transcription factors associated with timing enhancers can either recruit chromatin-modifying enzymes to remove histone modifications or directly displace nucleosomes upon binding.We found that this model, where histone methylation and chromatin compaction are coupled to each other, recapitulates essential dynamic properties of timed chromatin state switching, as observed for Bcl11b and other gene loci. A major finding from genome-wide association studies (GWAS) has been the identification of many disease-associated variants in putative enhancers128,129. Some of the strongest signals come from immune-related diseases, suggesting a significant role for genetic risk in immunopathology. A CaRE4 deletion results in increased polarization towards the Th17 fate under conditions of low IL-2. Timing enhancers control the activation times of lineage-specifying genes in immune development and function26,40,51,65,78, and could consequently set the sizes and fractions of different immune cell lineages that emerge. Timing enhancers control the timing at which their target genes switch from a silent to an active chromatin state, which is then accessible to the transcriptional machinery. Timing enhancers can also be identified by the effects of their disruption on gene activation and target cell population fractions. Switching is initiated by the binding of trans-factors to the enhancer; however, even with full trans-factor induction and binding, switching does not occur rapidly. These elements typically contain multiple modules of transcription factor binding sites that are distributed over an extended genomic region. Amplitude enhancers are important for maintaining proper levels of expression after a gene locus has been activated, and we contrast them with timing enhancers here to distinguish between the functional properties of these regulatory elements; however, in keeping with the focus of this review, we do not discuss them further here. In this case, the strength of the timing enhancer not only affects the initial kinetics of gene induction, but also controls the final fraction of cells in the end population that stably express the target gene. Finally, despite subsequent work that has since shed light on the first two questions, it remained unresolved whether heterogeneity in gene activation is indeed caused by variability in the timing of gene activation via the direct action of enhancers or whether it may instead reflect variability in cell states that indirectly affect enhancer activity. Such an approach would build on earlier findings of dynamic enhancer control by demonstrating that an endogenous timing enhancer could act in cis to control the delay of a cell-fate specifying gene through epigenetic chromatin regulation. Using this approach, we found direct evidence for a cis-acting mechanism that generates a long, multi-day delay in the activation of Bcl11b, which encodes a transcription factor essential for T-cell lineage commitment54. 