The procedure used for obtaining consent was institutional review board approved and included standard components such as a description of the project, its purpose, the voluntary nature of participation, and issues pertaining to confidentiality. Participation in each of the activities was coded as a 1, and no participation in each activity was coded as a 0. Participation in each of the activities was coded as a 1, and no participation in each activity was coded as a 0. Based on a metric ranging from 0 (not true) to 2 (very true or often true), teachers rated how true each item was at the time or within the past 2 months. Regarding family characteristics, we included whether households were led by a single parent and families’ income-to-needs ratio, which was the household income divided by the poverty threshold. Furthermore, we use Nigg’s (2017) framework in our conceptualization of the following specific self-regulation constructs: executive function, effortful control, and impulsivity. Whereas the Baron and Kenny method detects an indirect effect by a reduction in size of the direct path after a mediator is added to a model, bootstrapping estimates an indirect-effect standard error that provides a criterion for statistical significance (MacKinnon, Lockwood, Hoffman, West, & Sheets, 2002; Preacher & Hayes, 2004). The arrows on the left represent path A, where self-regulation in preschool was estimated as a predictor of self-regulation at school age. In Figure 4, the statistics for path A were the same in mediation models predicting hyperactivity and inattention (b = −0.07, SE = 0.02, p < .01). This involves both lower-level EF, with components such as working memory (e.g., combination of short-term memory and focused attention), which occurs within a short temporal window (e.g., minutes), and higher-level EF, such as planning, which occurs within a longer time frame (e.g., hours or longer; Nigg, 2017). The standardized coefficient for this indirect effect was −0.06. Additionally, our findings help bridge separate literatures on different self-regulation constructs (Nigg, 2017), and our results add to the existing literature, which has not extensively examined various self-regulation constructs during the transition from early to middle childhood. Like lower-level EF, the temporal focus for EC (e.g., waiting 1 minute to open a gift) is more immediate. In turn, better social interaction may help children engage in numerous promotive activities.Furthermore, high-level EF in middle childhood predicted fewer behavior problems where there were links to anxiety, relations to social withdrawal, and associations with inattention. For example, the current study found that EC was salient during early childhood and that high-level EF was important during middle childhood for better friendship quality, more promotive factors, and fewer behavior problems. Future research on other types of self-regulation across early and middle childhood is needed. To our knowledge, the existing literature on children’s self-regulation tends to focus on self-regulatory processes within early childhood rather than across early and middle childhood. Previous research has rarely tested for longitudinal relations across different types of self-regulation during early and middle childhood (Harms, Zayas, Meltzoff, & Carlson, 2014; Raver, McCoy, & Lowenstein, 2013), although this would help clarify the use of different types of self-regulatory terms (Jones, Bailey, Barnes, & Partee, 2016; Morrison & Grammer, 2016; Nigg, 2017). Still, largely absent from the extant literature is investigation of associations from lower-level EF in preschool to higher-level EF during middle childhood in the context of more rigorous models that include multiple measures of self-regulation, control for a wide range of demographic characteristics, and are estimated among low-income, ethnic minority children (Jones et al , 2016; Morrison & Grammer). Here, we take a first step at examining these links by capturing friendship quality specifically in terms of caring behavior between friends, which involves peers validating other children’s skills, ideas, and worth (Parker & Asher, 1993). Participation in both after-school programs and volunteer activities has been positively linked to well-being (Mahoney, Parente, & Lord, 2007; Scales, Blyth, Berkas, & Kielsmeier, 2000). Participation in both after-school programs and volunteer activities has been positively linked to well-being (Mahoney, Parente, & Lord, 2007; Scales, Blyth, Berkas, & Kielsmeier, 2000). Children and their families and teachers participated in additional waves, and the current study includes data from 4 and 6 years after baseline. 