No phosphorylation of Y142 could be detected in samples from intact mice (Fig 4B). To further explore for possible crosstalk between β-catenin and AR in castrate resistant prostate cancer, we investigated the colocalization of AR and β-catenin by fluorescent microscopy using xenografts harvested before and after castration. The AR is suspected to play an important role in castrate resistant prostate cancer. β-catenin activity is regulated by phosphorylation followed by degradation. β-catenin activity is regulated by phosphorylation followed by degradation. Affymetrix Genechip analysis identified changes in expression of 1,092 genes in response to androgen stimulation in LNCaP cells (26). The importance of validating endogenous complexes using in vivo physiological or pathological conditions is based upon: 1) protein-protein interactions are dependent upon concentrations of the proteins as well as the levels of stimulation, and thus overexpression of a protein by transfection may lead to false-positives; 2) over-expression or forced expression of proteins may cause aberrant cellular localization and/or inappropriate timing of expression if the expression of proteins are “normally” dependent upon the cell cycle phase; 3) protein modifications required for interactions may vary in different cells or under different cellular conditions; 4) cell cultures cannot substitute the physiological milieu of in vivo conditions nor can cell cultures mimic accurately the hormonal progression that occurs in vivo in response to castration of the host; and 5) the three-dimensional architecture of the xenograft and potential effects on E-cadherin and other cell adhesion molecules may not be accurately represented using cells maintained in monolayer. Activity of Wnt/β-catenin pathway in castrate resistant prostate cancerThe Wnt pathway and its interaction with AR have been suspected to play important roles in prostate cancer (48–50). Increased levels of β-catenin combined with decreased Tcf3/Lef would provide more β-catenin protein to be recruited by AR. In the present study, we applied Affymetrix GeneChip (Human Genome U133 plus 2) combined with the LNCaP xenograft and Hollow Fiber models to identify global changes in gene expression changes associated with castrate resistant prostate cancer. The syntheses of cDNA and biotinylated cRNA were performed according to the protocols provided by the manufacturer (Affymetrix, Santa Clara, CA). The immunofluorescence staining of proteins was detected using a Zeiss Axioplan-2 Fluorescence Microscope (Zeiss, Toronto, ON, Canada). There were 79 genes identified to be significantly differentially expressed between castrate resistant versus androgen-dependent clinical samples with the p-value lower than 0.001 (SI Table 2). To characterize the status of the AR pathway in castrate resistant prostate cancer, a hierarchical two-dimensional clustering algorithm that was based on similarity of expression patterns was applied to 1092 genes previously identified to be differentially expressed in response to androgen in LNCaP cells maintained in cell culture (26). 