Almost all animals in which bursicon-expressing neurons were suppressed by transfer to 31°C between days 5-7 APF had unexpanded wings. To do so, we took advantage of an intrinsic temperature-sensitivity in the action of the EKO channel discovered in the course of experiments with the CCAP-Gal4 driver. Flies expressing a single copy of UAS-EKO under the control of CCAP-Gal4 and raised at 18°C uniformly failed to expand their wings, whereas flies of the same genotype raised at 31°C expanded their wings normally. As has been shown previously, injection of bursicon-containing blood into newly emerged blowflies fails to induce air swallowing, though it does induce premature tanning (Cottrell, 1962c). Most of these fibers have pronounced varicosities characteristic of release sites, suggesting that the hormone is being secreted into the central nervous system. Preparations in which only BSEG neurons (Fig 5A) were labeled consistently showed GFP-labeled processes that ramified throughout the CNS. Hormones are major determinants of behavior and often insure congruence of an animal's actions and physiological state by exerting their effects both on the brain and on other tissues. The Burs-IR of BSEG processes is also depleted in rk4 mutants at this time (Fig. In contrast, and consistent with our Western blot data, the Burs-IR of BAG processes in rk4 mutants is often not fully depleted 60 minutes after eclosion (Fig. Fibers with bursicon-immunoreactive varicosities that are characteristically found in the abdominal nerves of both control and mutant animals five minutes after eclosion (Fig. 7C, upper right panel).Figure 7D summarizes the immunostaining results from all preparations analyzed. Burs-Gal4 constructs and transgenic Drosophila linesPCR primers (P252F 5′-TGATTAGCCAATAAGTTGTGAGG-3′ and P252R 5′CTCGTCGGCCCGACTGCGA-3′) were designed to amplify the 252 bp region between the ATG start codon of burs and the stop codon of the nearest predicted coding sequence upstream of it. The PCR product containing this putative burs promoter fragment was cloned using the TOPO TA cloning kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and sequenced using Big Dye chemistry (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) before being subcloned into the EcoRI site of the Gal4 vector, pG4PN (gift of John Carlson Lab, Yale University) and sequenced to check for correct orientation. One of these lines, P12, with an insert on the 2nd chromosome was used in the work described here. Rabbit anti-bursicon α-subunit (anti-burs) antibodies were used at 1:5000 dilution, and mouse anti-bursicon β-subunit (anti-pburs; gift of Aaron Hsueh) were used at 1:500. At least six preparations were analyzed at each time point by confocal microscopy, and surviving cells were identified from analysis of multiple image planes of confocal Z-series, where they could easily be distinguished from cellular debris, which typically formed smaller immunoreactive spots. To detect DNA fragmentation as a marker of apoptosis, TUNEL labeling was performed on central nervous system preparations excised from animals sacrificed six hours after eclosion. To represent the intensity and frequency of labeling of individual identified neurons with each driver, we created consensus expression patterns derived from multiple CNS preparations of each genotype. Abdominal Contraction and Air SwallowingExperimental animals were isolated as wandering 3rd instar larvae and transferred to individual food vials to complete development. Air swallowing was quantified by measuring the volume of air in the gut of the fly. The air was released by opening the gut membrane and the liberated bubble was photographed as it rose to the surface. We have shown previously that both wing expansion and bursicon release into the hemolymph can be suppressed in newly eclosed adults by expressing three copies of the transgene encoding the suppressor K+-channel UAS-EKO using the CCAP-Gal4 driver line (Luan et al , 2006). We used the putative promoter/enhancer region of the gene encoding the bursicon α-subunit (also known as burs) to drive expression of Gal4 in bursicon-expressing neurons in transgenic flies as described in Materials and Methods. 1).As shown in Figure 1 (A-B, D), Burs-Gal4 driven UAS-EGFP expression in the central nervous system of the third larval stage largely overlaps with the pattern of immunoreactivity obtained by staining with an anti-burs antibody. Most of the neurons that express the burs subunit alone are also CCAP-immunopositive (data not shown) and are included in the pattern of Burs-Gal4 expression.The pattern of burs expression becomes more restricted in the pharate adult (Fig. 