More studies need to be completed to fully understand the implications of tedizolid on myelosuppression as the literature surrounding it being used for more than 6 days is limited.The ESTABLISH trials also noted a lower association of neurotoxicity, both peripheral and optic neuropathy, with the use of tedizolid compared to linezolid [62]. These properties give both medications an advantage over vancomycin, daptomycin, and the long acting lipoglycopeptides. 2.6.1Overview of the Market:Many drugs are currently available to treat SSTIs. Furthermore, oritavancin and dalbavancin, long acting lipoglycopeptides, are being marketed to emergency departments to bypass hospital admissions altogether. Furthermore, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and doxycycline have questionable activity against Streptococcus pyogenes, another common cause of SSTIs [12,13]. First, lipoglycopeptides have activity against both MRSA and other common Gram-positive pathogens which cause SSTIs, including Streptococcus pyogenes [6, 8]. Second, both drugs have an incredibly long half-life and cannot be removed through dialysis [17, 18], making management of an acute allergic reaction very limited. However, two important differences should be noted. Specifically, both antibiotics inhibit protein synthesis by binding to the bacterial 23S ribosomal RNA of the 50S ribosomal subunit [25, 26]. 2.6.5Pharmacodynamics and MicrobiologyTedizolid, like linezolid, has potent activity against a variety of Gram-positive organisms, including MRSA, methicillin-susceptible S. aureus (MSSA), Streptococcus pyogenes, Streptococcus agalactiae, Streptococcus pneumoniae, Enterococcus species, and Coagulase-negative Staphylococci [31–33]. The continued increase in incidence of multidrug resistant organisms (MDRO), such as MRSA, is considered a significant health threat by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), and contributes to 2 million infections, 23,000 deaths, and up to $20 billion dollars in excess healthcare costs annually in the United States [3]. Important clinical implications, such as CYP450 interactions, drug-drug interactions, and important side effects are discussed in detail in the safety, tolerability, and toxicity section. It is defined as a central nervous system disease with clinical manifestations that include altered mental status, ataxia, restlessness, lower extremity hyper-reflexia and diaphoresis which can progress to severe symptoms such as delirium, seizure, shock, coma, and death. 