GTs of ShhCre/GFP;β–catloxEx3 embryos were much larger than those of wild-types at E12.5, and immunostaining showed accumulation of β-Catenin in the UE (Fig. In situ hybridization revealed that Fgf8 was overexpressed in the GOF cloacal endoderm at E10.5 (Fig. Intriguingly, ectopic Fgf8 expression was detected in similar sporadic areas in the inter-limb ectoderm of Msx2-Cre;β–CatloxEx3 embryos (Fig. We did not observe any change in apoptosis in the UE (Supplemental Fig. 4C, C’) and severe excessive endodermal growth confined to the proximal end (Fig. This region-specific phenotype correlated with an increase in pHH3 staining specifically at the proximal end (Fig. At E16.5, mutant GTs were severely dysmorphic and preputial swellings failed to join on the ventral side (Fig. Consistently, Shh expressing UE were exposed (Fig. 7L, arrows), which may partially compensate for the loss of β-Catenin in adherens junctions. This upregulation was also confirmed by real-time PCR analysis (data not shown). Mitotic index was calculated in eight different mutants and seven wild-types by counting PHH3 positive cells in a 0.03 mm2 region. A more than two folds reduction was detected in the mutant (5.29±0.95% in controls vs 2.24±0.53% in mutants, p<0.0001).Consistently, mesenchymal expression of CyclinD1, a cell cycle regulator and a direct WNT target, was also downregulated (Supplemental Fig. These data provide in vivo evidence for the function of dUE in orchestrating and maintaining mesenchymal gene expression. Consistently K14, an intermediate filament protein that gives tensile strength to epithelium, is not expressed in the mutant ectoderm and the fact that mutant ectoderm shows signs of stretching suggest lack of tensile support could directly contribute to the phenotype. The swellings subsequently merge medially to form the genital tubercle (GT) and continue to grow distally. For studies involving embryos from E14.5 onward, only males were presented (except for Supplemental Fig. We propose that although Plakoglobin can connect E-Cadherin to α-Catenin and maintain the basic structure of adherens junction, such a junction might not provide the same adhesive force as the wild-type congeners. In situ hybridization35S in situ hybridizations were performed on PFA-fixed paraffin-embedded 10 µm sections as described previously (Wawersik and Epstein, 2000). Electronic Microscopy AnalysisFor SEM analysis, samples were fixed in 3% glutaraldehyde, post-fixed with 1% aqueous osmium tetroxide for 4 hours then processed using the Osmium-Thiocarbohydrazide-Osmium (OTO) method, dehydrated in alcohol and critical point dried from liquid CO2. For TEM and semi-thin histology, samples were fixed in paraformaldehyde and glutaraldehyde, and postfixed with aqueous 1% OsO4 for 2 hours. Apoptosis AssayTUNEL staining was performed on paraformaldehyde (PFA)-fixed paraffin-embedded 10µm sections using the In Situ Cell Death Kit (Roche Diagnostic Corp., Indianapolis, IN), according to manufacturer’s instructions. RT-PCR analysis showed that Tcf1, Lef1 and Tcf4 were expressed throughout GT development (Supplemental Table 1) and 35S-in situ hybridization revealed that Tcf1 and Tcf4 were co-expressed in the dUE where TOPGAL activity was detected (Fig. Several WNT ligands including Wnt2, Wnt3, Wnt4, Wnt5a, Wnt9b and Wnt11 were expressed in the developing GT, with Wnt5a and Wnt9b expression detected in the dUE (Supplemental Table 1 and Supplemental Fig. We first analyzed tissue specificity of the Cre lines by crossing them with the Rosa26-LacZ reporter mice (R26R) (Soriano, 1999). At E10.5, no morphological difference in the cloaca region was observed between wild-type and LOF embryos. 