These results provide evidence suggesting that PKD-dependent fission activity regulates the formation of TGN to cell surface specific transport carriers. The silencing effect of this plasmid was confirmed by Western blotting of CHO cells and primary neuronal cultures (Suppl. TfR-GFP expressing pyramidal neurons, selected using wide field epifluorescence, were imaged with TIRFM. Examples of different types of fusion events are shown in Figure 6. Because this phenomenon is paralleled by Golgi tubulation (Lijedahl et al , 2001; Prigozhina and Waterman-Storer, 2004; Bossard et al , 2007; this study), and because expression of constitutive active mutants of PKD 1-3 induces Golgi vesiculation/fragmentation, it has been proposed that PKD has a role in the regulation of fission of exocytic carriers from the TGN to the cell surface (Yeaman et al , 2004; Diaz-Añel and Malhotra, 2005; Bossard et al , 2007). In fact, after PKD1 depletion, these two dendritic membrane proteins colocalize with vesicles containing VAMP2, an axonal membrane protein trafficking to axons and dendrites, but that is selectively retained at the axonal membrane (Sampo et al , 2003). Accordingly, after expression of PKD1-KD, spectral confocal microscopy revealed extensive colocalization of LRP and VAMP2 in vesicle-like structures emerging from the Golgi and entering neuritic processes. Interestingly, no missorting was detected after expression of P155G, a PKD1-KD mutant unable to bind DAG, and hence lacking Golgi localization. Supplemental Table II First, an average background fluorescence value was determined from several regions containing unlabeled neurites then subtracted from the whole image. First, an average background fluorescence value was determined from several regions containing unlabeled neurites then subtracted from the whole image. In order to quantify the fluorescence in axons and dendrites, several 1-pixel wide 100 μm lines were drawn on randomly selected portions of the axon and the dendrites (6–10 lines each) using the MAP2 or tau signals as a guide, then these regions were transferred to the HA-mLRP4 or GFP-TfR fluorescence image and the average fluorescence for each region was calculated. This is potentially important, since PKDs have been implicated in the selective regulation of basolateral protein trafficking in polarized epithelial cells (Yeaman et al , 2004).Since previous studies have shown that in non-neuronal cells inhibition of PKD at the TGN blocks the anterograde membrane transport of the temperature-sensitive ts045 mutant of vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein (VSVG) fused to GFP (Yeaman et al , 2004; Prigozhina & Waterman-Storer, 2004), we first examined whether or not the anterograde membrane trafficking of TfR-GFP was reduced after expression of the kinase inactive mutant (kinase dead, KD) of PKD1 (PKD1-KD). Overexpression of PKCη over activates the fission reaction leading to Golgi fragmentation and this process is inhibited by expression of PKD1-kinase dead (Diaz-Añel & Malhotra, 2005). However, during the course of these experiments it became evident that expression of PKD1-KD induced a dramatic alteration in the intracellular distribution of TfR-GFP. 