However, when an ~15-fold excess (i.e., 5.0 μg) of purified fibronectin over what is typically associated with the EVs from pluripotent ESCs was used to treat ESCs placed in N2B27 medium, the levels of FAK activity as well as Oct3/4 and Nanog expression were increased compared to untreated cells (Figure S6D). Previous studies have shown that fibronectin associates with both MVs and exosomes and that it plays important roles in the ability of EVs to contribute to cancer progression, as well as in the developing embryo where its association with MVs helps to activate trophoblast migration and invasion into the uterine wall (Antonyak et al , 2011; Desrochers et al , 2016b; Jeppesen et al , 2019). RESOURCE AVAILABILITYLead ContactFurther information and requests for reagents may be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Richard Cerione (rac1@cornell.edu).Materials AvailabilityThis study did not generate new unique reagents.Data and Code AvailabilityOriginal data are deposited in Mendeley Data: http://doi.org/10.17632/mt4gm74tbw.1 The medium was replaced daily for up to 5 days.Inhibitor and Purified Fibronectin TreatmentsCells maintained under the indicated culturing conditions were treated with 7.5 μM FAK inhibitor III (FAKi), 2.5 μM Y15 (also referred to as FAK inhibitor 14), 25 μg/ml RGD peptide, and either 320 ng or 5.0 μg of purified fibronectin. those larger than 0.22 μm) were considered microvesicles (MVs), and were either resuspended in PBS for use primarily in biological assays, or lysed using lysis buffer (25 mM Tris, 100 mM NaCl, 1% Triton X-100, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM NaVO4, 1 mM β-glycerol phosphate, 1 μg/ml aprotinin, and 1 μg/ml leupeptin). A linear sucrose gradient was assembled on top of the mixture by sequentially layering 700 μl of 15 fractions (i.e. FM1-43FX dye (Thermo Fisher Scientific) was then added to the partially clarified medium to a final concentration of 5 μg/ml for 30 minutes. The membranes were blocked with 10% BSA in 20 mM Tris, 135 mM NaCl, and 0.02% Tween 20 (TBST) for 30 minutes, and then incubated with the indicated primary antibodies diluted in TBST overnight. The slides were permeabilized with 0.1% Triton X-100 diluted in PBS, blocked with 10% BSA diluted in PBS, and incubated with an Oct3/4 antibody (Santa Cruz Biotechnology) and a Nanog antibody (Abcam) diluted in 5% BSA in PBS at a 1:200 dilution, for 2 hours. The slides were washed with PBS, and then were incubated with an anti-mouse IgG-Alexa 488 conjugate antibody (Thermo Fisher Scientific) and an anti-rabbit IgG-Alexa 548 conjugate antibody (Thermo Fisher Scientific) diluted in 5% BSA in PBS at a 1:400 dilution, for 1 hour. The slides were again washed with PBS and visualized by brightfield and fluorescent microscopy. All images were captured using IPLABS software (BD Biosciences) and processed using ImageJ software.Embryo Collection and Blastocyst Outgrowth AssaysFemale FVB/N mice, between 8 and 20 weeks of age (Jackson Laboratory), were super-ovulated by injecting pregnant mare’s serum gonadotropin (PMSG) and human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG). The concentration of cDNA was measured using a NanoDrop Spectrophotometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the cDNA samples were subjected to RT-PCRESC Microinjection into Mouse BlastocystsFemale B6(Cg)-Tyrc-2J/J (B6-albino) mice, between 8 and 20 weeks of age (Jackson Laboratory), were super-ovulated by injecting pregnant mare’s serum gonadotropin (PMSG) and human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG). In contrast, differentiated mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) showed little or no detectable expression of these proteins, with the exception of Klf4; whereas, as expected, they expressed the fibroblast marker, Thy1 (Rege and Hagood, 2006). The ESC-derived MVs and exosomes were further resolved by sucrose density gradient sedimentation. ESCs that were cultured under differentiation conditions and treated with either MVs or exosomes from pluripotent ESCs also retained their ability to form spheres and express AP activity (Figures 3D–3F). Similar results were obtained when a second FAK inhibitor, Y15 (also sometimes referred to as FAK inhibitor 14), was used (Figures S5A–S5C)To further examine the role of FAK in maintaining a stem cell phenotype, ESCs were placed in N2B27 differentiation medium containing various combinations of MVs and exosomes isolated from ESCs and treated without or with one of the two FAK inhibitors, FAK inhibitor III (FAKi) or Y15. We also detected fibronectin in the sucrose gradient fractions that contained MVs and exosomes, i.e., in the intermediate-density fractions (Figure 6B). 