In narcolepsy patients, neither antidepressants nor stimulants were found to have significant effects on any of the features. In contrast, a positive MSLT (mean sleep latency (MSL) of ≤8 minutes as well as presence of ≥2 SOREMPs) is both sensitive (90–95%) and specific (95%), but time consuming and expensive. and scoring procedures across different clinics. and scoring procedures across different clinics. Whatever the case might be, these likely all represent sleep stage dissociation in wake and/or N1 sleep. In this direction, it may be that EEG surrounding brief arousals should have been excluded from the analysis, although this would not be practical in clinical practice. Patients were age- and sex-matched with controls obtained from volunteers drawn from the Wisconsin Sleep Cohort; an ongoing longitudinal population-based study of sleep patterns in the general population.20 A stratified random sample of employed adults aged 30–60 years in south Wisconsin was recruited for a nocturnal PSG at baseline. The sample has been described elsewhere,15,21 and all evaluation included a comprehensive medical and medication history, nocturnal PSG and, for narcolepsy cases, a PSG-MSLT. Optimally, spectra could be extracted from automatically scored hypnograms to limit differences in scoring – both across the two standards and also across sites and scorers. This would, however, introduce new challenges as no automatic scoring method has proven to be valid in narcoleptic patients. This would, however, introduce new challenges as no automatic scoring method has proven to be valid in narcoleptic patients. EEG in epochs neighboring stage transitions was excluded from the analysis to minimize “mixed” stage 30 sec epochs.The entire EEG recorded at the C3-A2 derivation was passed through a muscle artifact detector described in details in Brunner et al 25 This detector is a widely used method and compares high frequency activity in each 4-s window with the activity level in a local 3-min window surrounding the 4-s window. Visual inspection of the signals and spectra showed that the notch filter had negligible effect on frequencies in a 2-Hz window around 20 Hz. This normalization approach was chosen to minimize frequency specific artifacts and because the differences between these sleep stages were thought to be the most interesting when analyzing NC.The mean spectrum of each stage and normalization was calculated, resulting in eight mean spectra (five stages from Sum=1 plus three Subtract Stage normalizations).To reduce the number of features to be included in the feature selection approach, we first compared mean spectra in NC versus controls in the various sleep stages using one-sided t-tests testing for significance for every frequency sample in the frequency range 0.5–35 Hz. 