Of the 135 GAL-positive ICNs that were randomly selected, 130 neurons (96.3%) were approached by CGRP-positive boutons and nerve fibers. The presence of SOM in the trigeminal ganglion of mammals (Lazarov 2002) is interpreted as a species difference. After a 5-min rinse in Tris-buffered saline (TBS; Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany), slides were incubated for 1 h at RT in TBS containing 10% donkey serum (Dianova, Hamburg, Germany), 1% BSA (Roth), and 0.5% Triton X-100 (Merck, Darmstadt, Germany). After a 5-min rinse, slides were incubated with antibodies for double and triple labeling of the markers listed in Table 1.Followed by a rinse in TBS (four times 5 min), binding sites of primary antibodies were visualized by corresponding Cy2- or FITC-, Cy3-, and Cy5-tagged antisera (Dianova; 1:750) in TBS, containing 1% BSA and 0.5% Triton X-100 (1 h at RT) followed by another rinse in TBS (four times 5 min). Slides were embedded in TBS-glycerol (1:1 at pH 8.6).For all antibodies used, negative controls were carried out by replacement of primary antisera by normal serum from those species in which the primary antibodies were raised, or TBS, and resulted in no staining. Slides were incubated in the following solution (1 h at 37°C): 1 mg NADPH (Biomol, Hamburg, Germany) and 0.25 mg nitroblue-tetrazolium chloride (Biomol) per ml PBS, containing 0.5% Triton X-100 (Merck). In order to demonstrate putative synaptic contacts, single sections of z staples of same planes in two different channels were taken and subsequently merged.For quantification, we applied two methods: first, ICN or neurons in cranial ganglia were counted using an epifluorescence microscope [Leica Aristoplan, Wetzlar, Germany; filterbloc I3 for Cy2 and N2.1 for Cy3 (both Leica), with ×25 or ×40 objective lenses] or second, plots were created on screen from confocal images out of merged and un-merged pictures, and co-localization rates were defined (see Fig. To avoid double counting of neuronal cell bodies in cranial ganglia, every fifth section was investigated. Double-labeling for nNOS and either GAL or VIP was done on one eye for each marker. 1c–e) was found in 194 neurons (87.3%); 16 (7.2%) were positive for GAL only and 11 (4.9%) were positive for nNOS only. In this eye, 75 neurons were immunoreactive for GAL only (15.9%), while 5 neurons were immunoreactive for VIP only (1.1%). Finally, TH immunoreactivity was not detected in nNOS- or GAL-positive ICN.In 54 randomly selected ICNs positive for VIP or GAL, there was no co-localization with either ChAT (Fig. To date, there is morphological evidence for one function for these cells: they probably innervate choroidal blood vessel walls and so might influence choroidal blood flow, resulting in alterations in intraocular pressure (IOP). 