Human neuroimaging studies have shown that viewing pictures of appetizing foods can lead to activation close to this region (Simmons et al , 2005). Parametric analysis of neural areas whose activity varied systematically with these two ratings showed that a part of the right insular cortex decreased in activity with increasing ratings of both attractiveness and moral goodness. In addition, we observed surprisingly little convergence of ALE foci across the individual gustation and olfaction analyses, despite strong expectations in the literature for such a convergence for flavor processing. Most of the overlap for these two modalities was seen in the ventral part of the cingulate cortex (the pregenual ACC) in BA 32. For example, Small et al  (2001) had subjects eat chocolate to beyond satiety. Finally, Zald et al  (2002) found medial OFC activation for the consumption of both pleasant (sugar) and aversive (quinine) solutions, with no mediolateral differences across valence. The basic model of aesthetic processing that we propose involves an interaction between interoceptive and exteroceptive processing via recurrent connectivity between anterior insula and OFC, respectively, as shown in Fig. Finally, we include the ventral basal ganglia in this circuit, which are considered to be among the “hedonic hotspots” of the brain (Berridge et al , 2009). For that, we need to switch the focus to social needs and the emotions associated with them. Evolutionary scenarios for the arts invoke the mechanisms of sexual selection and group selection to explain these capacities (Brown, 2000; Brown and Dissanayake, 2009; Miller, 2000; Voland and Grammer, 2003). inclusion criteria for papersMeta-analysis of 93 published neuroimaging studies was performed using “activation likelihood estimation” (ALE) analysis. While we intended to include touch as a fifth sensory-specific analysis, there was an insufficient number of papers dealing with positive-valenced evaluation in order to do so (see Francis et al , 1999; Rolls et al , 2003).Coordinates for activation foci from conditional contrasts were taken from the original publications. While we intended to include touch as a fifth sensory-specific analysis, there was an insufficient number of papers dealing with positive-valenced evaluation in order to do so (see Francis et al , 1999; Rolls et al , 2003).Coordinates for activation foci from conditional contrasts were taken from the original publications. ALE meta-analyses were performed using GingerALE 2.0.1a3 (brainmap.org). Human neuroimaging studies have convincingly shown that the brain areas that mediate aesthetic responses to artworks overlap those that mediate the appraisal of objects of evolutionary importance, such as the desirability of food items or the attractiveness of potential mates. No voxel in the brain was concordantly engaged in all four modalities (“4-of-4” analysis). In other words, the OFC showed a more sensory-specific than supramodal pattern of activation. There was overlap between gustation and olfaction and between gustation and vision in the pregenual ACC (ventral BA 32), although this area is not typically found in published work on flavor processing. Four of the six studies of musical pleasantness did (Blood and Zatorre, 2001; Brown et al , 2004; Koelsch et al , 2006; Menon and Levitin, 2005), while only one of the five studies of visual artworks did (Di Dio et al , 2007). 