We showed that upon exposure to UVB-induced stress, ROCK1 was activated, bound to and phosphorylated JIP-3, and consequently activated JNK. Some studies have presented alternative means to activate ROCK1 that include binding of ROCK1 to arachidonic acid, oligomerization of ROCK1, or cleavage of ROCK1 by caspase-3 during apoptosis or differentiation (15). Our study sheds new light on the mechanism of upstream regulation of JNK-mediated apoptosis, an area of emerging interest with clinical relevance to common human diseases such as diabetes (47) and cancer (48). Because ROCK is involved in different biological processes, it is an important therapeutic target for the treatment of various human diseases including cancers, cardiovascular diseases, and neurological disorders. The gel was dried and exposed to film. The gel slice was excised for radioactive counting. Ten micrograms of the FLAG-purified material was incubated with recombinant ROCK1 (Upstate Biotechnology) in 50 μl of kinase mixture (20 mM Tris, pH 7.5, 5 mM MgCl2, 100 mM KCl, 0.1 mM DTT, 100 μM ATP, 1 mM EDTA, 1 μM microcystin-LR, and 1 μCi [γ-32P]ATP) and incubated at 30°C for 30 min. After centrifugation, individual fractions (200 μl) were collected from top to bottom. Flow cytometry and apoptosis assaysCell death as determined by the fragmentation of DNA was measured by photometric enzyme immunoassay with the Cell Death Detection ELISA kit (Roche Applied Science) following the manufacturer’s suggested protocol. Although ROCK plays an important role in apoptosis, the mechanism of its action is obscure. Eight-week-old ROCK1+/- mice and their WT littermates were used for UVB-exposure experiments. On the next day, the anesthetized animals were irradiated by UVB with the use of a custom-made UVB-irradiation apparatus with four photochemical lamps (RPR 3000, Southern N.E. The skin was embedded in tissue-freezing medium (TBS, NC) and 7-μm frozen sections of tissue were obtained from the skins of animals subjected to different doses of UVB exposure. To map the JIP-3-binding region(s) of ROCK1, we carried out pull-down experiments with constructs expressing different truncated forms of ROCK1, along with FLAG-JIP-3 or empty vector (pcDNA3), transfected into 293ET cells. JIP-3 bound to the N-terminus of ROCK1 containing the kinase domain (fig. 2B, right panel, lane 9) after 30 min incubation, and this effect was blocked by a ROCK inhibitor, Y-27632 (Fig. Tandem mass spectrometry was performed to map the Ser/Thr phosphorylation sites in JIP-3. S2), and cosedimentation of JNK, RhoA, and ROCK1 was observed in fractions 15 to 17, suggesting that ROCK1 and JIP-3 formed a complex with a link to JNK. The functional importance of the newly identified phosphorylation sites of JIP-3 was tested by generating point mutations of the target Ser residues in JIP-3. We also studied whether Y-27632 could affect the UVB-induced apoptotic response. 