Flow cytometry FISH (Flow-FISH) revealed that the fluorescence signals in total splenocytes (Fig. In addition, previous reports show several other accelerated aging phenotypes in Pin1−/− mice, including overall appearance, motor coordination defects, neuron degeneration, retina degeneration, testis atrophy and breast atrophy20,22,25. Given the central role of Prodirected phosphorylation and Pin1 in diverse cellular processes and inhibition of Pin1 by oxidative damage, Pin1-catalyzed prolyl isomerization is a novel mechanism to help coordinate various cellular processes needed for preventing aging, and its deregulation contributes to age-related disease. Further studies how Pin1-dependent regulation is coordinated with other aging mechanisms and how Pin1 deregulation contributes to aging and age-related disease should help elucidate the molecular mechanisms of aging and might lead to new interventions for preventing or treating age-related disease. Recombinant proteins were expressed and purified from bacteria or synthesized using in vitro TNT system as described previously18,19. The precipitated proteins were washed 4–6 times in the same buffer and subjected to immunoblotting analysis. Cells were harvested at each time points, and total lysates were analyzed by immunoblot with anti-TRF1, anti-Pin1, anti-tubulin, or anti-b-actin antibodies. The blots were scanned and semi-quantitated by using the software NIH image 1.6.2, as described previously12. Cells were pelleted and resuspended in 500 µl of hybridization solution (70% formamide, 20 mM Tris, pH 7.0, 1% BSA, 0.3 µg/ml fluorescent isothiocyanate-conjugated (CCCTAA)3 peptide nucleic acid (PNA) probe (Applied Biosystems). X-ray and histological examinationsFor bone density, femurs and tibiae were harvested from Pin1+/+ and Pin1−/− mice and were analyzed with GE Locus eXplore µCT. These results indicate that the Thr149-Pro motif is necessary for Pin1 binding and might be phosphorylated in cells. To confirm these results, we used a Pin1 dominant-negative mutant, GFP-S16A Pin1 WW domain mutant to inhibit Pin1 function in cells. 2g, h), indicating the requirements for both binding and isomerizing activities of Pin1. Importantly, Pin1-catalyzed postphosphorylation conformational changes can have profound effects on many key proteins in diverse cellular processes23. Pin1 knockdown did not inhibit telomerase activity (Fig. 