Changes in GlyT1 activity have been shown to alter both glutamatergic transmission (Martina et al , 2005) and long term potentiation (LTP) (Martina et al , 2004), in a manner that is hypothesized to depend on the role of glycine as a co-agonist of NMDA receptors. Across a population of thirteen cells, we found that the peak EPSP magnitude measured during 10 Hz AP-EPSP pairs, decreases to the same peak magnitude as EPSPs alone at 10 Hz (Fig. We also studied the effects of taurine, a lower affinity (yet specific) glycine receptor agonist, on RDE. In this case, one would expect RDE to be less pronounced under voltage clamp, which under the assumption of good space clamp, should eliminate shunting effects. Across a population of 7 cells, we found that the mean excitability significantly increases (Fig. 3c), co-application of strychnine and amoxapine occludes RDE, such that the mean peak EPSP magnitude arising from EPSPs alone at 10 Hz is increased to the same magnitude measured for AP-EPSP pairs at 10 Hz (Fig. These results suggest that the second messenger cascade triggering RDE may be calcium mediated or could be calcium alone. 6b, c; blue; average depression = 0.56 ± 0.006), as shown in a sample trace in Fig. In contrast, even in response to high-frequency (10 Hz) CPs, both amoxapine (Fig. 6c; white; average depression = 1.1 ± 0.01) prevented LTD. Our results demonstrate a previously undetected form of modulation of glycinergic transmission in the hippocampus. After the dissection, slices were allowed to recover at 35°C for thirty minutes in a holding chamber and were brought back to room temperature for at least thirty minutes before recording. After the dissection, slices were allowed to recover at 35°C for thirty minutes in a holding chamber and were brought back to room temperature for at least thirty minutes before recording. The mechanistic basis of RDESeveral lines of evidence suggest that RDE is caused by the closure of postsynaptic GlyRs, a percentage of which are open in the quiescent slice. The slices were perfused in heated (35°C) and equilibrated with 95% O2, 5% CO2 ACSF in a separate holding chamber (Warner Instruments, Harnden, CT) mounted on a microscope stage. The slices were perfused in heated (35°C) and equilibrated with 95% O2, 5% CO2 ACSF in a separate holding chamber (Warner Instruments, Harnden, CT) mounted on a microscope stage. The receptors are abundant in stratum pyramidale and proximal stratum radiatum (Danglot et al , 2004), a location through which excitatory signals would pass, and therefore be affected by the shunt from these receptors. Given that RDE has a rapid offset (< 100 ms) and that bath-applied glycine prevents RDE, reduced GlyR sensitivity seems a more likely explanation than receptor trafficking. This result suggests that upregulation of transport (Model 3) at presynaptic glycinergic terminals may also contribute to RDE. Solutions and DrugsFor both the dissection and experiments, the slices were bathed in ACSF (in mM 126 NaCl, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 2 MgCl, 26 NaHCO3, 10 Glucose, 2.5 KCl and 2 CaCl2). Three pieces of evidence suggest that RDE may contribute to the frequency-dependent LTD we observed. Wittenberg and Wang (2006) did the “anti-causal” recordings without blocking inhibition (whereas we blocked GABAergic inhibition using bicuculline). Other possible candidates include endogenous cannabinoids anandamide (AEA) and 2-AG which are known to block GlyRs (Lozovaya et al , 2005), and AEA which also directly up-regulates glycine transport (Pearlman et al , 2003). It is important to note that our study was carried out in animals aged P14- P21. ElectrophysiologyPyramidal neurons in CA1 were identified visually and recorded with whole-cell patch clamp recording techniques using infrared differential-interference contrast (DIC) visualization (Axioskop 2 FS; Carl Zeiss Inc., Germany). Statistical tests were paired t-tests, a t-test followed by a correlation coefficient calculation, an analysis of variance (ANOVA) or t-test, followed by Bonferroni’s multiple comparison tests, as indicated in the text. Characterizing glycine receptors (GlyRs) in hippocampusWe studied the basic properties of postsynaptic glycine receptors (GlyRs) known to be present in hippocampus (Racca et al , 1998; Chattipakorn and McMahon, 2002). While the source of glycine in the hippocampus remains unclear, calbindin-, calretinin-, and parvalbumin-positive interneurons in the CA1 are hypothesized to co-release GABA and glycine (Danglot et al , 2004), which are carried by the same vesicular transporter (Wojcik et al , 2006). 