Post-HIRREM Brain Lateralization and PTSD SymptomsIn a further check of the relationship between brain lateralization and PTSD symptoms in this sample, we correlated the symptoms reported on the PCL-M inventory with whole brain lateralization, and with lateralization in the SN. However, research specifically looking at the lateralization of functional connectivity in this population is lacking. The use of HIRREM has been associated with significant reduction of self-report symptoms of insomnia,34 persisting symptoms following athletic concussion,35 and perimenopausal symptoms,36 as well as improved objective measurements of autonomic cardiovascular regulation (heart rate variability and baroreflex sensitivity).37 Clinical outcomes associated with application of HIRREM for participants enrolled in the present study included significant improvements in multiple measures of autonomic cardiovascular regulation (SDNN, rMSSD, high frequency, low frequency, and total power, HF Alpha, sequence all, and systolic, diastolic, and mean arterial pressure) and significant reductions in self-reported symptom inventory scores to 6 months following intervention completion (PTSD, insomnia, depression, and anxiety). Because the present study instead assessed the laterality of functional connectivity, the predictions are more tenuous. The current investigation extended the study of brain asymmetries associated with chronic stress by focusing on the lateralization of functional connectivity rather than structural or brain activation asymmetries per se. Participants were recruited from a variety of sources: The Care Coalition, which serves the needs of the Special Operations community, physician referral from military facilities, physician referral from the community, referral from prior participants, or response to posted advertisement. HIRREM SessionsFollowing informed consent, and as part of the enrollment data collection, baseline recordings were initially obtained for each participant in an assessment session of 45 minutes using twochannel, three-minute recordings from at least six paired locations on the scalp (F3/F4, C3/C4, P3/P4, T3/T4, FZ/OZ, O1/O2, FP1/FP2, and CB1/CB2). Recording for each location entailed 1 minute with eyes closed, 1 minute with eyes partially closed, and 1 minute with eyes open and performing cognitive tasks such as recalling numerical stimuli or reading from a passage.Brainwave data from the baseline recordings were used to create individualized protocols for the initial HIRREM sessions, whereas review of data from the prior session was used for subsequent sessions. Some protocols were received with eyes open and others with eyes close, depending mostly upon the function of the lobe being observed based on scalp location during that particular protocol. The majority of the protocols received were with eyes closed to support the brain’s internal regulation and reset. Anatomical images were collected using a Magnetization Prepared Rapid Acquisition Gradient Echo (MPRAGE) sequence. fMRI data were acquired in the axial plane using 187 images with TR = 2,000 ms and voxel dimensions of 4 × 4 × 4 mm with a resulting total scan time of 6 minutes and 14 seconds. The Pearson correlations between the time series for each voxel and every other voxel were calculated. 