Emerging evidence suggests that neurons, glial cells, pericytes, and ECs, by virtue of their close proximity, form a topographical compartment termed the neurovascular unit, in which they are functionally coupled to maintain brain homeostasis (10, 11). Artemin-neutralizing antibodies had little effect on neuroprotection by control MBECs, but reduced neuroprotection by EC-Rac1+/− MBECs by half. In clinical application, less invasive delivery through blood flow and cerebrospinal fluid was ineffective because of the poor bioavailability at target tissues due, in part, to poor BBB penetration, low tissue diffusion, and short half-life (7–9). Furthermore, BM disruption commences within hours of the stroke onset (3). It remains to be determined, therefore, what the effect of sustained inhibition of endothelial Rac1 is on neurogenesis, which is coupled to angiogenesis within the neurovascular niche (52, 53). Our study is somewhat limited by the examination of transcriptional profile of Rac1 deletion in heart rather than brain ECs. The cDNA was reverse transcribed from 8 μg of RNA, coupled to Cy3 or Cy5 dye, and hybridized in four replicates to a microarray containing 19,549 70-mer oligonucleotides. The fold ratio of Rac1+/− versus Rac1+/+ for each reporter was statistically analyzed with one-sample Student's t test and Wilcoxon signed rank test and considered significant at P < 0.05. The mRNA abundance was normalized with GAPDH mRNA or 18S ribosomal RNA. Images were acquired by a confocal microscope (Leica). The NADPH oxidase activity was determined as diphenylene iodonium (DPI)–inhibitable lucigenin chemiluminescence by a luminometer (PerkinElmer). After centrifugation in 45% Percoll (20,000g), the top layer was plated in DMEM/F12 with 10% horse serum, 10% FCS, heparin, antibiotics, and ECGF. P < 0.05 was considered to be significant. Rac1flox/flox mice were crossed with Tie2-Cre Tg mice to generate EC-Rac1+/− (Tie2-Cre Rac1flox/+) and control (Rac1flox/+) mice. Relative CBF returned to >95% of baseline values, indicating almost complete reperfusion without residual occlusion.Cerebral infarct volume was measured 22 hr after reperfusion. The following scoring system was used: 0, no motor deficits (normal); 1, flexion of the contralateral torso and forelimb on lifting the animal by the tail (mild); 2, circling to the contralateral side but normal posture at rest (moderate); 3, leaning to the contralateral side at rest (severe); and 4, no spontaneous movement (critical).Absolute CBF in ischemic and non-ischemic hemispheres was measured at the end of 2 hr MCAo using an indicator fractionation technique as described, with slight modifications (3). Cerebral blood flow in each hemisphere was calculated as follows: CBF (ml/100 g per min) = (hemisphere count (c.p.m.) The GTP-Rac1, total Rac1 and actin protein levels in mouse EC lysate were determined by immunoblotting analysis with Rac1 (BD Biosciences) and actin (Sigma) antibodies. Consistent with these anatomical findings, neurological deficits were less severe in EC-Rac1+/− mice than in control mice (Fig. Briefly, fluorescent dye labeling was performed using the Atlas Powerscript Fluorescent Labeling Kit (Clontech). The cDNA was labeled via a coupling reaction to the Cy3 (2 replicates) or Cy5 (2 replicates) dye, then purified and concentrated. The cDNA was labeled via a coupling reaction to the Cy3 (2 replicates) or Cy5 (2 replicates) dye, then purified and concentrated. Complete details on the method for this analysis, the software and information on the biological data sets are available at http://www.broad.mit.edu/gsea/index.jsp. Neuroprotection in the transient MCAo model is thought to depend on two major factors: residual cerebral blood flow (CBF) in the ischemic region and CBF-independent, direct neuroprotective components, such as BBB functionality and growth factor–mediated neurosurvival. Cells were fixed with 3.7% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 10 min on ice, and then free aldehyde was reduced with 50 mM NH4Cl. The fluorescent images were acquired by TCS SP5 confocal microscope (Leica). Medium from the bottom well was incubated with assay buffer containing 0.5 mM guaiacol, 50 mM Na2HPO4 and 0.6 mM H2O2. Expression profiling of Rac1 haploinsufficient ECsThe independence from differences in blood flow of the reduction of infarct size in EC-Rac1+/− mice compared to controls suggested that decreasing EC Rac1 had a direct neuroprotective effect. Briefly, dissected cortices were digested with 0.25% trypsin at 37°C for 10min, and DNase I (25 U/ml) for 5 min. Neurons on cover slips were fixed in 3.7% paraformaldehyde in PBS on ice for 15 min, washed, and permeabilized with methanol at −20°C for 10 min. Aortic segments from mice were embedded in 0.4 ml per well of Matrigel (BD Biosciences) in 24 well plates. After the gel solidified, 0.5 ml of culture media was added and replaced every other day. At day 8, photographs were taken to evaluate capillary outgrowth.Statistical analysis.Unless otherwise noted, all statistical analysis was carried out by ANOVA followed by Fisher's test. Photographs were taken at day 8. The fluorescence images were captured with confocal microscope. The fluorescence images were captured with confocal microscope. J Cell Biol 143, 1385−1398 (1998).6. T. Hirota, N. Kunitoku, T. Sasayama, T. Marumoto, D. Zhang, M. Nitta, K. Hatakeyama, H. Saya, Aurora-A and an interacting activator, the LIM protein Ajuba, are required for mitotic commitment in human cells. T. Tatsumoto, X. Xie, R. Blumenthal, I. Okamoto, T. Miki, Human ECT2 is an exchange factor for Rho GTPases, phosphorylated in G2/M phases, and involved in cytokinesis. In addition, crystallin αB immunolabeling was more intense with Rac1+/− than with Rac1+/+ ECs, consistent with the 4.24-fold up-regulation of the crystallin αB (Cryab) messenger RNA (mRNA) seen in the microarray data (Fig. In addition, crystallin αB immunolabeling was more intense with Rac1+/− than with Rac1+/+ ECs, consistent with the 4.24-fold up-regulation of the crystallin αB (Cryab) messenger RNA (mRNA) seen in the microarray data (Fig. Lane, P. d'Herin, M. Harper, M. Kress, E. A. Nigg, Phosphorylation by p34cdc2 regulates spindle association of human Eg5, a kinesin-related motor essential for bipolar spindle formation in vivo. 2, D and F, Supplementary text, Table 2, and tables S1 and S3). F. Vazquez, G. Hastings, M. A. Ortega, T. F. Lane, S. Oikemus, M. Lombardo, M. L. Iruela-Arispe, METH-1, a human ortholog of ADAMTS-1, and METH-2 are members of a new family of proteins with angio-inhibitory activity. N. Sawada, S. Salomone, H. H. Kim, D. J. Kwiatkowski, J. K. Liao, Regulation of endothelial nitric oxide synthase and postnatal angiogenesis by Rac1. In Rac1+/+ ECs, H/R elicited a 1.9-fold increase in the activity of NADPH (reduced form of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate) oxidase, the major EC source of ROS, over its activity under baseline (normoxic) conditions (Fig. Many of these proteins enhance collagen fibrillogenesis and matrix-cell adhesion, processes that stabilize the BM (26). 