After blocking the cells with blocking solution (10% goat serum plus 1% immunoglobulin free bovine serum albumin in phosphate buffered saline), they were incubated with the primary antibody, rabbit anti-Caveolin-1 (dilution 1:250, BD Transduction Lab) at 37°C for 1 h and visualized with the secondary antibody, goat-anti rabbit IgG-Alexa Fluor 568 (dilution 1:400, Life Technologies). Cell nuclei were stained with NucBlue (Life Technologies). Images were captured using the Leica SP5 Confocal microscope with 63× objective. Immunofluorescence staining of the fibroblasts with antibody to the caveolin-1, revealed significantly reduced fluorescence in the patient’s cells compared to the control subject’s cells (Fig. She also developed insulin resistance, acanthosis nigricans, hirsutism, diabetes mellitus, and hypertriglyceridemia during childhood and had marked hypoleptinemia and hypoadiponectinemia. Other distinctive clinical features included hypocalcemia and hypomagnesemia, which were attributed to vitamin D resistance. It is likely that caveolin-1 has minimal role in the formation of caveolae in the fibroblasts. He was born full term at 39.5 weeks gestation with a birth weight of 2,930 g and a birth length 51 cm. His hair was thin and grew slowly but the nails grew normally. A recent echocardiography was normal with pulmonary artery pressure in the normal range. Ultrasound examination in utero at 20 weeks gestation identified unilateral pleural effusion which resolved by 33 weeks gestation. She was small for gestational age and had pleural effusion at birth. She had normal subcutaneous fat on the gluteal region. Molecular diagnostic studies for Hutchinson–Gilford progeria syndrome including genotyping for LMNA and ZMPSTE24 were negative and microarray chromosomal analysis (1.8M probes by Quest) was normal. Exome SequencingOne out of six trios was processed by Ambry Genetics (∼30 × coverage of the Agilent Sure SelectXT Human All Exon 50 Mb target, 2 × 100 bp Illumina HiSeq sequencing) while the other five trios were processed by the University of Washington Center for Mendelian Genomics (UW–CMG). Immunofluorescence StainingThe cells were seeded on sterile glass 35 mm MaTTek dishes. 