Blue voxels in Figure 2 represent deactivations at a threshold of P < 0.001, uncorrected, with those satisfying this threshold having a false discovery rate <0.08. Blue voxels in Figure 2 represent deactivations at a threshold of P < 0.001, uncorrected, with those satisfying this threshold having a false discovery rate <0.08. Only clusters comprised of 20 voxels or more are displayed. Note that similar patterns arise in the unscaled case, but only after imposing a more stringent T threshold on the thalamic activation and a less stringent T threshold on the fusiform deactivation. The quality assessment using visual inspection detected artifacts, mostly associated with motion, in each of the 35 EEGs used in this study. As observed in earlier studies of alpha (Goncalves et al , 2006; Laufs et al , 2006a), some variety is seen in the temporal evolution of alpha intensity from session to session. The broader thalamic and fusiform ROIs have the same outcome, but with less significance. Nevertheless, the results can be discussed in the framework of current understanding of brain dynamics. There are individual sessions for each ROI that fail to show activation or indeed activate in a manner opposite to that observed in the group analysis. The observed variation in alpha strength occurs at sub-Hertz frequencies aligned with those recently reported for spontaneous fluctuations in resting state Blood Oxygen Level Dependent (BOLD) signals (Damoiseaux et al , 2006; Gusnard et al , 2001). These broader derivations are plausibly more influenced by alpha-like rhythms, such as the mu rhythm (Niedermeyer, 1997) that emanate predominantly from central regions. It is used here, however, under the premise that in the relaxed state with no directed task a homeostasis of mental effort might be established. This forms the basis of a conjecture that the average BOLD intensity across the brain unchallenged by a specific task remains constant. It should be noted that without global scaling the same activation/deactivations patterns arise, but with more emphasis concentrated on the thalamic activations (Fig. The advent of methods to subtract the large EEG artifact caused by the rapidly switching gradient coil currents during fMRI has permitted the use of all time points of EEG data acquired concurrently with imaging (Allen et al , 2000). T2*-weighted, BOLD sensitive, echo-planar images were acquired with parameters: repetition time/echo time = 1800/25 milliseconds, field of view = 256 mm × 256 mm, matrix = 64 × 64, 5-mm slice thickness with axial orientation. For all but four of the scanning sessions, a total of 400 image volumes were acquired at the rate of one every 3 seconds for a total acquisition time of 20 minutes per session. Eye movement and ECG data were also collected for subsequent ballistocardiographic artifact removal. The cleaned data were subsequently decimated to 200 Hz and derived in a standard, 16-channel bipolar montage. After applying a threshold for statistical significance, activated voxels in the composite were localized by overlay on an anatomic reference image generated by averaging the individual structural images of all subjects. Both activation and deactivation was observed in the composite maps as shown in selected axial slices in Figure 2. Activation is displayed in orange at a P value threshold of 0.001, uncorrected. A cluster is also present in medial cerebellum. 