We quantified enrichment of the lncRNAs MALAT1 and MEG3 as controls. Error bars represent the standard deviation of n=3 independent experiments. Annotated GATA6-AS transcripts are shown in red and the transcript cloned in DE cells is shown in black. **** indicates p <0.0001 compared to day 0 (One-way ANOVA, n=4 independent experiments). This experiment was performed twice with similar results. BRD3 RIP normalized to IgG (center) and input (right) are shown for hESCs. Points are colored to indicate different thresholds as labeled on the far right. We confirmed that the DIGIT-4xS1m transcript was retained in the nucleus after transient transfection (Figure 1A), as previously described for endogenous DIGIT4, and precipitated DIGIT-4xS1m with streptavidin beads in UV cross-linked cells (Figure 1B). (A) PONDR VSL2 plots showing the ordered and disordered regions of the long (left) and short (middle) isoforms of BRD3, and BRD2 (right). The site targeted by gRNA is indicated with an arrow. The start of the coding sequence (CDS) is indicated, and the mEGFP cDNA is inserted in frame after the start codon. (C) Design of the homology vector for the insertion of mEGFP. The genomic locations of homology arms are indicated. The genomic locations of homology arms are indicated. This experiment was performed twice with similar results. Scale bar represents 2 μm. This experiment was performed twice with similar results. We performed UV cross-linking followed by streptavidin precipitation and mass spectrometry (MS). Primers that uniquely recognize either the long (left) or short (right) isoforms of BRD3 were used for amplification. Expression of CXCR4 and SOX17 was quantified by qRT-PCR after three days of DE differentiation. Ectopic expression of both the long and short isoform of BRD3 rescued expression of CXCR4 and SOX17. This experiment was performed twice with similar results. This experiment was performed twice with similar results. BRD3 regions are defined as containing promoters if the region is located within 2kb of a transcription start site (TSS). The bold horizontal line represents the median for each box plot. The lower whiskers represent Q1–1.5*(Q3-Q1) and the upper whisker represents Q3+1.5*(Q3-Q1). Supplementary Table 1 Supplementary Table 2 Supplementary Table 4 Future studies are needed to determine if DIGIT, BRD3 and SMARCD1 are present in the same complex.To understand how BRD3 interacts with the entire transcriptome, we performed RIP using an antibody against BRD3 followed by sequencing of precipitated RNA. BRD3 shows specificity for DIGIT compared to BRD2 and BRD4BRD2, BRD3 and BRD4 but not BRDT are expressed in endoderm cells (Extended Data Figure 2E), and we asked if the other BET proteins interact with DIGIT. BET proteins contain two bromodomains, which bind acetylated histones7,8, and an extra-terminal domain that enables interaction with other proteins, including transcription factors and co-activators9–12. BRD2, BRD3 and BRD4 are BET family proteins that are ubiquitously expressed and have unique functions in development. To investigate whether BRD3 puncta are phase-separated condensates, we first asked if BRD3 forms condensates in live cells. These findings demonstrate that each BET protein forms nuclear condensates in definitive endoderm, and the condensates formed by BRD3 are distinct from those formed by BRD2 and BRD4. A titration of sodium chloride (NaCl) showed that BRD3 forms droplets at concentrations as high as 300 mM (Figure 4B). The equivalent intensity of droplet formation was not observed under these conditions until a BRD3 concentration of greater than 1 μM in the presence of SCRM or in the absence of RNA (Figure 4D). Different functions of BET proteins in ESCs are associated with different patterns of genome occupancy, where BRD4 is enriched at enhancers, while BRD2 and BRD3 are enriched at promoters15. 