Further testing may yield a higher alpha score.Finally, as with all anonymous, Web-based, self-report studies, this survey cannot confirm the status of respondents and is vulnerable to inaccurate response rates based on poor recall or response bias. Indeed, our scales were correlated with social desirability, and as a result of ceiling and floor effects, the scales may not have captured the full range of opinions. They also grappled with stress associated with moral dilemmas, including difficulty protecting participant confidentiality, their inability to provide participants with needed counseling and services, frustration when screening protocols did not reflect real-world drug-use habits, participant attempts to over- or underreport their drug use, concern about consent comprehension, and the effort involved in defending their work against pervasive community research distrust. How to best meet these obligations when working with marginalized and vulnerable groups raises ethical challenges for which the broad language of federal regulations offers incomplete guidance (Fisher 1999; 2004). To achieve this, we constructed, psychometrically evaluated, and examined relationships among six scales for a Web-based survey designed to test the following hypotheses: Detailed demographic and employment characteristics are provided in the Results section. Detailed demographic and employment characteristics are provided in the Results section. When designing participant protections, investigators typically draw on their own expertise and the advice of institutional review boards (IRBs) and community advisory boards (CABs). In this study, scale scores were applied to statistically control for the effects of social desirability bias in response to other measures. To assess response bias, Pearson product moment bivariate correlations between the social desirability scale and the six new scale scores were conducted. To test hypotheses 1 and 2 (see “Aims of the Current Study”) relationships among scales were then analyzed through two-tailed partial correlations controlling for social desirability. Demographic and Employment CharacteristicsDemographic and employment characteristics are provided in Table 2. The majority of participants were female, self-identified as non-Hispanic white, had received a bachelor’s or graduate degree, worked on 2–3 projects during the past 5 years, had at one time lived in the same community in which they conducted research, and reported a mean age of 35.10 years (standard deviation [SD] = 10.92, range = 20–65). Results are therefore reported using untransformed data.The results of the partial correlations supported hypotheses 1 and 2 (see Table 3). Block 2 included the RECS, RCI, RMI, and RMDS (see Table 4). Items with the lowest endorsement (57–62%) on the ORSS pertained to counseling for CRWs who experienced trauma on the job, realistic expectations regarding recruitment numbers, and assignment of CRWs to multiple roles. 