It is widely theorized that aminosilane attachment proceeds via the primary amine catalyzed SN2 exchange reaction between the ethoxy groups of silanes and the oxygens of silanols.47–49 Because of this, APTES and AHAMTES, which possess three ethoxy groups each, are inherently more reactive than APDMES containing only a single ethoxy group. Three ethoxy moieties allow APTES and AHAMTES to self-polymerize with surface bound and free aminosilanes to form three-dimensional amine rich surface multilayers (Figure 3).While this explains the tendency for APDMES to form only low amine content monolayers, it fails to explain why APTES and AHAMTES, despite their equivalent number of ethoxy groups, result in considerably different amine concentrations. Because aminosilylation relies upon intramolecular primary amine catalysis, it is essential that the terminal amines of APTES and AHAMTES be available to the sites of SN2 exchange.48,49 While APTES is believed to form a five-membered cyclic intermediate which places its primary amine adjacent to the site of SN2 exchange, AHAMTES possesses a significantly longer alkyl chain which reduces its ability to undergo a similar intramolecular catalysis (Figure 2).48,49 This conformational difference reduces the ability of AHAMTES to form high amine content surface coatings.49 The sulfhydryl concentrations of APTES, AHAMTES, and APDMES were found to be 0.0312 ± 0.006 (n = 9), 0.0181 ± 0.003 (n = 3), and 0.0130 ± 0.001 μmol/mg (n = 3), respectively (Table 1).While these results support the expectation that higher levels of surface bound amines result in increased NAP attachment, a direct proportionality between amine content and subsequent NAP attachment was not observed. Mouse fibroblast cells were exposed to 10 μL of SNAP-DE material (1 mg/mL). Mouse fibroblast cells were exposed to 10 μL of SNAP-DE material (1 mg/mL). 2.1.Materials.Fossil Shell Flour Diatomaceous Earth was purchased from Perma-Guard, Inc. (Bountiful, UT). 200 proof ethanol was obtained from Decon Laboratories, Inc. (King of Prussia, PA). 2.4.FQ Primary Amine Quantification.The ATTO-TAG FQ test for primary amines was conducted in accordance with a previously reported protocol.42 Stock solutions of 10 mM FQ and 10 mM KCN in methanol and water, respectively, were prepared. A working ATTO-TAG FQ solution was created which consisted of 10 μL of FQ stock solution, 20 μL of KCN stock solution, 190 μL of water, and 5 μL of sample. To measure total NO loading, alternating injections of 0.25 M copper(II) chloride and ascorbic acid were added to the NOA reaction vessel. Between the final and initial NOA measurements, physiological conditions were maintained by storing the samples in 0.01 M PBS with EDTA at 37 °C. The bacteria were then separated from the original media and suspended in PBS buffer. This provided the bacteria with an osmotic physiological environment and prevented bacterial proliferation. The SNAP-DE and unmodified DE were suspended in triplicates (n = 3) in 1 mL of PBS-bacteria culture. This weight was determined by calculating the total NO released per milligram of SNAP-DE over a 24 h period under conditions mimicking those of the bacterial suspension. 2.10.Formazan-Based Cell Cytotoxicity Test.The cell cytotoxicity kit (CCK-8) (Sigma-Aldrich) provides a standard WST-8 [2-(2-methoxy-4-nitrophenyl)-3-(4-nitrophenyl)-5-(2,4-disulfophenyl)-2H-tetrazolium monosodium salt] based cell viability assay. The culture medium was replaced intermittently and cells were checked daily for growth and contamination. After the confluence reached above 80%, cells were detached from the T-flask (trypsinized with 0.18% trypsin and 5 mM EDTA). Around 5000 cells/mL were seeded in a cell culture grade 96 well plate and incubated for 24 h in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2.Cytotoxicity Test.The manufacture’s protocol (Sigma-Aldrich) was followed to perform the cytocompatibility test using a CCK-8 kit on the mouse fibroblast cells. After 24 h of cell culture incubation in a 96-well plate, 10 μL of the leachates from control DE and SNAP-DE was added (n = 7) to the cells. 