This study also demonstrates that additional ICU beds are not required as the critical care system evolves, at least in the US. This study also demonstrates how discrete event simulation can be a valuable tool for health system planning. This simulation study provides important new insight suggesting that selective prehospital triage can feasibly allocate non-trauma, critically ill patients to referral hospitals without compromising ICU census, procedural volume at smaller hospitals, or EMS travel times. Future work should explore these findings through more complex models that incorporate larger regions and the entire trajectory of critical illness. Data sourcesWe used a cohort of all acute care hospitalizations in King County, Washington in 2006. Incident EMS calls were linked at the patient level to 2006 geographic and population data in the US Census, and at the hospital level to the 2006 American Hospital Association Annual Survey (AHA). (17) We defined mechanical ventilation and hemodialysis using validated International Classification of Diseases, version 9—clinical modification procedure codes. (17) We defined mechanical ventilation and hemodialysis using validated International Classification of Diseases, version 9—clinical modification procedure codes. After developing the model we calibrated it against observed data by running it for 365 days (January 1, 2006 to December 31, 2006). If the nearest hospital was full, the patient was sent to the next nearest hospital.Once admitted to a hospital, we assumed that patients’ treatment, ICU admission status, and outcomes were similar to their baseline hospital. Despite regionalization's potential benefits, key gaps remain in our understanding of how it will impact the delivery of critical care in emergency departments, hospitals, and emergency medical services (EMS) agencies. Third, we simulated up and down-triage after reducing the number of ICU beds at each hospital by 25%, considering that King County, Washington has ICU bed availability (37.5 per 100,000 capita) that exceeds most US regions which average 20 to 25 ICU beds per 100,000 capita (“up and down triage with ICU bed reduction”). We chose mechanical ventilation and hemodialysis to illustrate advanced procedures for which a minimum number may be required for clinical competence. 