Case selectionThe archives of Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Massachusetts General Hospital, and Stanford Hospital were searched for cases containing “chondroblastoma-like osteosarcoma” in the diagnostic top line or report text, as well as cases containing “chondroblastoma” along with terms “atypical,” “malignant” or “metastatic.” Two cases were published previously [8, 9]. This study was approved by the institutional review boards of the authors’ institutions.Sixteen candidate cases were found; hematoxylin and eosin-stained slides and immunohistochemistry (IHC) were re-reviewed concurrently by four co-authors (JLH, GPN, YPH and DJP). One had no additional mutations; the other had a nonsense SETD2 K1937* mutation and copy number gains and losses on chromosomes 9 and 10. More work is needed to determine whether histone H3 methylation abnormalities are a recurrent feature of chondroblastoma-like osteosarcoma. More work is needed to determine whether histone H3 methylation abnormalities are a recurrent feature of chondroblastoma-like osteosarcoma. Immunohistochemistry and molecular studies were used to support diagnoses when available.Imaging studies were reviewed by a musculoskeletal radiologist (MAB). Integrated case review with clinicopathologic featuresUpon re-review, 7 of 11 tumors were classified as malignant chondroblastoma and 4 of 11 were classified as chondroblastoma-like osteosarcoma (Table 1). Tumor recurrence demonstrated lytic expansile lesions with cortical destruction and associated soft tissue mass. One patient with a rib primary (case 1) who developed recurrence also developed femur, hip soft tissue, scalp, chin, and cerebellar metastases over a 26-year period (Fig. Case 4 had the H3F3B K36M missense mutation (35% allele fraction) and additionally was found to harbor SETD2 K1937* nonsense mutation (26% allele fraction) and copy number gains and losses in chromosomes 9 and 10. Two occurred in males and two occurred in females, with a median age at presentation of 21 years (range: 19–40 years). The second patient who died of disease had a scapular primary tumor and developed widespread metastases including metastases to the lungs (interval after initial diagnosis: 4, 8, and 13 years), distal humerus (23 years), skull (24 years), and brain (25 years).The chondroblastoma-like osteosarcomas were found on consensus review to contain regions of cytologically malignant cells producing bone, distinguishing them from malignant chondroblastoma. 