Coronal sections of the cerebral cortex showed midline fusion of the cerebral hemispheres (Fig. 5J, asterisk).Although almost all of the MORE-DG null mice showed complete loss of dystroglycan expression in the brain, one of the mice showed mosaic dystroglycan expression and developed milder pathology than mice with more complete loss of dystroglycan expression. The microphthalmic eyes presented small or absent lenses (Fig. This study examined the expression and function of dystroglycan in the WWS CNS and the effect of dystroglycan loss on the development of the mouse brain and eye. On immunoblot of WWS brain, we detected a reduced molecular weight of α-dystroglycan (∼90 kDa) similar to what has been observed in skeletal muscle (Kim et al , 2004), indicating the disruption of a common step in the posttranslational processing of α-dystroglycan. The mutation may be present outside the coding region of one of the known causative genes or it may lie in an unknown gene in the biosynthetic pathway of dystroglycan. In addition, it drives expression of Cre recombinase throughout the entire mouse epiblast, whereas the GFAP-Cre transgene restricts expression to radial glia and astrocytes, silencing dystroglycan in these cells and a subset of neurons that are the progeny of radial glia (Tallquist and Soriano, 2000; Zhuo et al , 2001). The amplicons generated were purified and directly sequenced with the BigDye terminator cycle sequencing kit version 3.1 (Applied Biosystems). POMT1 and LARGE were sequenced by PreventionGenetics. The solubilized fraction was incubated with WGA-agarose beads (Vector Labs) for 24 h. The beads were then washed with TBS containing 0.1% Triton X-100 and protease inhibitors, and the bound protein was eluted with TBS containing 0.1% Triton X-100, protease inhibitors, and 300 mmN-acetyl d-glucosamine. Adult or embryonic tissues were embedded in paraffin, and 5 µm sections were cut on an RM2135 microtome (Leica). For immunofluorescence, 3- to 4-week-old brains and eyes were fresh frozen in isopentane cooled by dry ice, and 8 µm sections were cut on a CM3050S cryostat (Leica). Laminin binding is also lost after chemical deglycosylation, and it is blocked by competition with the IIH6 antibody (Ervasti and Campbell, 1993). The specificity of the assay was confirmed by laminin overlay on immunoblots of α-dystroglycan purified from rabbit skeletal muscle and WGA-enriched extracts of human brain (Fig. Despite the loss of dystroglycan from this basement membrane, the epiblast and proamniotic cavity had normal histology.Crosses between floxed-dystroglycan and Mox2-Cre mouse strains generated MORE-DG null mice at a 12% frequency corresponding to half the predicted Mendelian ratio (25%). The integrity of these basement membranes was examined by immunofluorescence detection of laminin and perlecan. 