Efforts to purify a mammalian enzyme that cleaved the N9-N10 bond of 5-formyltetrahydrofolate surprisingly led to the purification of rat ferritin [25]. PABA-GLU, as well as its metabolite acetamido-PABA-GLU (a product of hepatic metabolism of PABA-GLU), are in urine and in the gastrointestinal tract where endogenous bacteria, include E. coli, reside. The difference in metal requirement for each enzyme may contribute to the differences in substrate specificity as well. In Ps-CPG2 a single aspartate (D141) coordinates both zinc ions in the active site, and this amino acid is not conserved in either AbgA or AbgB, suggesting that there are differences in the metal binding sites of these subunits. Specificities for various folyl and anti-folyl substrates among these enzymes varied, however, as did their metal dependence. We are continuing our studies of the abg region to better understand the role of these genes and proteins in Escherichia coli physiology. Protein Sequence AlignmentsSequence alignments were performed using the free online software created and supported by the UniProt Consortium [16]. RS-16 carboxypeptidase G2 (P06621) were obtained from the UniProt website. The velocity was calculated as the slope of the line (nmoles of product versus time in minutes). The larger, catalytic domain possesses two zinc cations in close proximity at the active site while the smaller domain is involved in subunit interactions. While we theorized that each PGH subunit might perform one of the functions of Ps-CPG2, i.e., subunit interaction or catalytic function, the homology among AbgB, AbgA and Ps-CPG2 spans the entire length of the proteins.Both Ps-CPG2 and PGH are metalloproteins. At the homologous position of Ps-CPG2 Asp141, both AbgA and AbgB have a histidine, while at the position of the zinc2-coordinated histidine in Ps-CPG2, AbgA and AbgB possess an aspartate and a glutamate, respectively. The prior experiment involved a time consuming system in which samples of reaction mixtures were filtered to remove enzyme, then subjected to chemical modification (dabsylation) of the product glutamate which was then analyzed by HPLC. 