We found that both antibodies recognized a protein(s) in untreated and LPS treated cell extracts that is involved in complexes on region I (data not shown) and II (Fig. Antibody C138 caused a supershift of bands a, b and c (band e in lanes 22 and 27, Fig. Antibody C138 caused a supershift of bands a, b and c (band e in lanes 22 and 27, Fig. Antibody C138 caused a supershift of bands a, b and c (band e in lanes 22 and 27, Fig. 3A) and of band d (band e in lane 17, Fig. 3A) and of band d (band e in lane 17, Fig. Through EMSA we have shown that AaDefA1 regions I and II bind NF-κB/Rel-type proteins. Members of the NF-κB family of transcription factors are known to mediate the transcriptional induction of numerous genes in mammalian immune and inflammatory reactions and C/EBP binding motifs have also been identified in a number of these (Betts et al , 1993; Diamond et al , 2000). It is not known if such heteromers bind DNA via adjacent, overlapping or novel sites, or whether only one of the subunits binds DNA. GeneRacer kit (Invitrogen Ltd, Paisley, UK) was used according to manufacturers instructions with nested primers (5′-CCGGTTCCTGTGGGTAGGCACTAGTAAT-3′ and 5′-GGTTTCCTCCGGCAGTTCATCGAAAAGA-3′). PCR products, cloned into pCR2.1 TOPO (Invitrogen), were sequenced prior to transfer into the luciferase expression vector pGL3-Basic (Promega, Southampton, UK). Actin 5C-Renilla transfection control plasmid was adjusted for sets of experiments (10–100 ng) such that Renilla activities were not less than 1% of firefly luciferase activities. Dual-luciferase reporter assaysFirefly and Renilla luciferase activities were measured using the Dual-Glo system (Promega). Briefly, cells were lysed in 24 well plates with 75 μl PBS and 75 μl luciferase reagent and transferred to a white 96 well plate to measure firefly luciferase activity. Aag2 cells were treated with 100 mg/ml lipopolysaccharide (LPS) for 16 h prior to extraction for LPS treated extracts. For supershifts, 1 μl of antibody was added to nuclear extracts and incubated for 20 min on ice prior to addition of labelled oligonucleotide. However transcription factor binding to mosquito AMP gene promoters has so far only been demonstrated for NF-κB in Defensin genes (Barillas-Mury et al , 1996; Shin et al , 2002). We previously isolated an AgDef1 genomic clone and here we isolated two AaDefA genes. aegypti Defensin sequences were isolated from genomic clones of the Liverpool strain. Very similar patterns of up-regulation were obtained following the treatment of all transfections with either heat killed bacteria (Escherichia coli or Micrococcus luteus) or peptidoglycan (data not shown). Immune stimulation with M. luteus produced similar results (data not shown). 