3.6.Identifying clusters of patientsWhile the results above were based on correlating psychomotor and cognitive measurements over patients, the final exploratory analysis was based on the correlation between patients over all obtained scores. TeCAs/TCAs prescription correlated negatively with finger tapping (r = −0.46; p = 0.044) and positively with pointing performance (r = 0.52; p = 0.019) suggesting slower basic motor speed and coordination with TeCAs/TCAs treatment in 6 patients. Finally, administration of typical or atypical antipsychotics correlated positively with both trail making test scores (A: r = 0.66; p = 0.001; B: r = 0.57; p = 0.009) and negatively with DS-B (r = −0.45; p = 0.044). A data-driven clustering approach revealed a tendency towards two distinct subgroups. In line with this interpretation are several studies associating the very same areas with internal selection and initiation of movements in the healthy brain [54–57]). Accordingly, Rogers [22] reported marked deficits specifically in response selection in depressed patients with melancholic features. Based on these considerations, the aim of the current study was now to delineate PMD for internally vs. externally driven response selection and initiation as aspect of (fine) motor control in major depression. Any comorbid psychiatric or neurological diseases including alcohol or drug abuse was an exclusion criterion. As we did not introduce an age limit in order to also include older patients, we screened for dementia using the Mini Mental State Examination [MMSE (Folstein [37]] with a cut-off at 23. All subjects including healthy controls gave informed written consent to the study protocol, which had been approved by the local ethic committee of the RWTH Aachen University Hospital. These non-affective symptoms may severely impact on patients’ psychosocial functioning [3–5] but also pose challenges to treatment regimens that requite active participation of the patient, in particular psychotherapeutic intervention. The experiment consisted of 2 × 12 blocks of conditions, and lasted approximately 33 min. The experiment consisted of 2 × 12 blocks of conditions, and lasted approximately 33 min. For each condition 8 blocks of 60 s duration were presented in sequences of either 1 (‘Free’)–2 (‘Choice’)–3 (‘Reactive’) or 1–3–2 in the same pseudo-randomized order. For each condition 8 blocks of 60 s duration were presented in sequences of either 1 (‘Free’)–2 (‘Choice’)–3 (‘Reactive’) or 1–3–2 in the same pseudo-randomized order. The task consisted in making one actual word among four pseudo-words with increasing difficulty without time limitation. This non-parametric test was chosen as data (in particular the raw test-scores) did not fulfill the criteria for parametric testing, i.e., normal distribution. Due to their greater robustness against outliers, medians rather than means of test scores and measured values are reported. The fact that task performance, as indicated by error rates, was clearly not different between groups indicated that this slowing did not reflect a speed-accuracy-tradeoff. 