These results suggest that when RecG is active in the presence of ATP, it can rewind the complementary region on the fork substrate displacing SSB from the ssDNA.To investigate if the shift in the position of SSB was due to the regression of DNA by RecG, we performed experiments in the presence of the non-hydrolysable analog ATPγS, instead of ATP. As the forks used in this study were static, fork regression could not be visualized and in addition, the interplay between SSB and RecG during this process could not be studied. Although the remodeling of RecG by SSB was observed on the dynamic fork, the yield of double-blob complexes was considerably lower when compared with the static fork used previously 14. Protein preparations.RecG protein was purified as described previously7. Pooled fractions from the hydroxylapatite column were dialyzed overnight in S buffer [10 mM KPO4 (pH 6.8), 1 mM DTT, 1 mM EDTA and 100 mM KCl]. Briefly, freshly cleaved mica was incubated in 4ml APS (167 μM) in a cuvette for 30 min and then rinsed with ddH2O thoroughly, as described in ref 14. Ten microliters of the sample were deposited onto the APS mica for 2 min, cleaned with ddH2O, and dried with a gentle Argon gas flow. Sample preparation for time-lapse imaging in liquid with high-speed AFM (HS-AFM).The fresh cleaved mica was incubated with 2.5μl of the APS for 30min and then washed with ddH2O. Experimental design.The fork design used in this study has a 3’-end, 69nt ssDNA tail inserted between two heterologous duplex regions of different lengths (Figure 1), similar to the static fork DNA substrate Fork 4 (F4) which we used previously 13. This design allows the joint position to move between state S1 and state S2 as shown in Figure 1. A representative frame of AFM images of F12 on APS mica is shown in Figure 2. The average peak positions are 281 ± 9 bp and 308 ± 12 bp which corresponds to the two states of F12. The distribution of full length of F12 was fitted with single peak Gaussian, and the average length is 700 ± 26bp as shown in Figure 3D. This dynamic of the junction was visualized directly with HS-AFM (Supplementary movie S1 and selected frames in Fig. The annealed double strand is still visible as shown in Supplementary Figure S3A. The location of the protein on the fork was measured from the end of the parental strand, and the distribution of SSB positions are shown in Figure 4B. 