Supporting this view simulation studies show that one may generate patterns similar to resting state fluctuations by injecting stochastic activity in structural networks defined by anatomical connectivity information.57 On the other hand, some patterns of functional “resting state” connectivity exist, which cannot be explained by anatomical connections. When lying in an MRI scanner without a specific task we are not thus resting but instead performing all sorts of mental operations in succession or parallel. Given the high standardization of neuroimaging data reports and in particular the ubiquitous adherence to standard coordinate systems (such as the MNI system), the results reported in these studies can be readily compared with each other with respect to the spatial location of significant neural activity. Second, strong but non-matching evidence obtained from both analyses, however, may relate to the fundamental differences between two states. Relation to regional specializationIn contrast to the assessment of anatomical connectivity, which is closely related to the regional differentiation of brain (micro-) structure, functional connectivity is conceptually much closer related to the regional specialization of brain function. As noted above, there is growing consensus that functional connectivity in the task-free state reflects, similar to task-based functional connectivity, the degree to which different brain regions are involved in the same functional networks. Finally, modeling schemes may also differ with respect to the level of hemodynamic modeling involved.81-83 All of the approaches discussed here estimate effective connectivity from fMRI time series, which presents a challenge to the estimation of effective connectivity, since fMRI measurements do not reflect any neuronal signal directly but clearly after its convolution with a hemodynamic response function (HRF).84 Evidently, interactions in the brain should be expressed at the neuronal level instead of at the (measureable) level of hemodynamic responses. It has been suggested to first de-convolve the time-series of the seed region, hereby estimating its neuronal states.85,86 The interaction term between the de-convolved physiological regressor and the psychological factor is then again convolved with a canonical hemodynamic response function to represent a more faithful predictor of a PPI effect. Inclusion of these latter regressors of no interest is crucial to remove the main effects of either factor from the variance explained by the PPI regressor and thus remove confounding, e.g., stimulus-locked effects. Inclusion of these latter regressors of no interest is crucial to remove the main effects of either factor from the variance explained by the PPI regressor and thus remove confounding, e.g., stimulus-locked effects. Apart from temporal precedence, the second fundamental assumption in GCM is predictability. In this context, three aspects deserve special attention when SEM is applied to fMRI rather than, as originally proposed, PET data. These assumptions certainly met the case in PET images which are usually acquired over the course of several minutes while the subjects are constantly engaged in a particular task, but are more difficult to ascertain in fMRI time-series. On the other hand, the model parameters are fitted to represent the covariance structure of the measured (hemodynamic or metabolic) data, not the underlying neuronal activity. The modeled neuronal dynamics are then linked to the observable changes in the BOLD response via a biophysically validated hemodynamic forward model translating neuronal states into predicted measurements.51 In DCM, effective connectivity within a given brain network is inferred from the coupling parameters computed for the hidden neuronal states. The parameters of the model that best translate the input functions based on the experimental design into the measured time-series may be estimated by Bayesian inversion. Moreover, although model selection may allow to identify the most likely model given the measured data, inference is evidently limited to the models included into the comparison which may only reflect a small proportion of the potential full model space. Thus, while all approaches to effective connectivity analysis evoke a notion of causality, these differ between the different analysis concepts.In PPI, causality is understood as the contribution of another area to the local signal time-course and is thus inferred from dependencies revealed by context-dependent regression of a regional time-series on the activity in another brain region.In GCM causality is framed as predictability and temporal precedence, and parameterized in an increased predictability of current activity in area X by adding information about the history of a distant area Y to the history of X. As noted above, fMRI and PET are excellent tools to identify the regions recruited by a mental operation but cannot distinct the borders of cortical modules. Evidently, the precise nature of transmitted information remains obscure, but context dependency of promoting or inhibitory influence often enables to ascribe more specific functional roles to a particular area as would have been possible from the pure observation of task specific activations. Most approaches additionally evoke choices on model parameters ranging from the order of a multivariate autoregression to a particular hemodynamic model.80,89 On the deepest level, the various approaches available for modeling effective connectivity also differ in their concepts about brain dynamics. Regional structure-function relationshipsThese advances in the mapping of regional specialization led to the description of mental processes that recruit a specific, structurally defined, area. This long-standing discrepancy between highly precise and specific anatomical connectivity measures in non-human primates on one hand and the relatively coarse and limited methods available for the investigation of the human brain may explain why in particular anatomical connectivity of the human brain is often compared and referenced against that in non-human primates. The first is the direction of its principal axis, which corresponds to the direction of greatest diffusion (the principal diffusion direction, PDD). The first is the direction of its principal axis, which corresponds to the direction of greatest diffusion (the principal diffusion direction, PDD). The second important feature of the diffusion ellipsoid is its anisotropy, which corresponds to the preponderance of diffusion to follow the PDD relative to all other directions. The second important feature of the diffusion ellipsoid is its anisotropy, which corresponds to the preponderance of diffusion to follow the PDD relative to all other directions. Given the dynamic of the field and the constantly evolving methods and modeling approaches, the reader may be referred to the methodological papers describing the various methods for modeling diffusion directions and performing tractography.45-49 Assessment of, e.g., the number of samples in probabilistic tractography that reached a particular target from a specific seed region, is not a valid approach for quantifying the strength of a fiber bundle. Such parameters also reflect the probability of how likely it is to reach that particular target in a random journey along the principle diffusion directions relative to all other possible locations that could be reached. This may, in the most extreme cases, lead to the problematic view that connections that have not been found in monkeys are regarded as false positives in human DWI data while connections obtained in tracer studies that are not replicated are regarded as false negatives. First, axonal tracing also does not have perfect reliability. 