Five dummy variables are used to capture religious affiliation: Catholic, Orthodox Christian, Protestant, Muslim, Buddhist or Hindu, and Jews or other religious groups, with no religion serving as the reference category. Those who were assigned a color rating tended to be relatively light-skinned, with an average scale value of about 3. Those who were assigned a color rating tended to be relatively light-skinned, with an average scale value of about 3. Immigrants spent an average of 4.9 years in the United States prior to marriage. By far the largest visa category was spouse of a citizen or permanent resident, followed by employment visas (28.4 percent), legalization visas (15.8 percent), diversity visas (3.3 percent) and other visas (7 percent). Europeans, on the other hand, displayed many fewer respondents gaining permanent residence through employment visas; most (54.7 percent) entered as the spouse of a U.S. citizen or permanent resident. We find little evidence for a segmented pattern of marital assimilation in these estimates. Among control variables in the model, religion and visa category are most powerfully associated with the likelihood of marrying a U.S. native. The odds of marrying within the region of origin are 75 percent greater among those immigrants who speak English well or very well and they rise by 64 percent with each point increase in the log of the size of the regional population (exp[0.492]=1.636) but fall by 28 percent with each point increase in the log of the size of the home country population (exp[0–.324]=0.723). To the extent that marital assimilation is occurring among newly arrived immigrants, therefore, it does not appear to be channeled disproportionately toward native minorities nor does it depend on skin color, and in these ways do not support the propositions of segmented assimilation theory. Given the overwhelmingly Christian composition of mainstream America, this outcome is to be expected from classical theories of assimilation which posit social and cultural distance to be a deterrent to intermarriage. On the other hand, although nation-specific endogamy is the same as Europeans, Latin American immigrants display a much higher likelihood of intermarriage to other immigrants from their region of origin. Of course, the subjects of our study are only just arrived in the United States and whether the structural advantages of the Asians prevail to accelerate marital assimilation in the longer run remains to be seen. According to Gordon’s (1964) statement of classical assimilation theory, structural assimilation---the entry of a minority group into the mainstream labor market and the attainment of an occupational status comparable to that of the majority---would be followed inevitably by marital assimilation. In their analysis of 2000 Census data from the United States, for example, Fu and Hatfield (2008) found that native-born Asians displayed two distinct patterns of marriage. The propensity to intermarry also varies by age (Kulzycki and Lobo 2002), gender (Tubergen and Maas 2007), and religion (Alba and Golden 1986; Kalmijn 1998; Kalmijn and Tubergen 2010), as well as by contextual factors such as group size ((Blau, Blum and Schwartz 1982; Tubergen and Maas 2007; Lieberson and Waters 1988; Safi 2008; Kalmijn 1998; Hwang et al  1994; Kalmijn and Tubergen 2010; Fu and Hatfield 2008) and degree of spatial segregation (Muttarak and Heath 2010; Tubergen and Maas 2007; Kalmijn and Tubergen 2010). Given the long history of European immigration to the United States and the current prevalence of white European origins in the U.S. population, we expect European immigrants to display the highest likelihood of intermarriage with natives, other things equal. Although prior research identifies spatial segregation as a key factor promoting segmented assimilation, we do not have the neighborhood data necessary to test this proposition. Here we estimate multinomial models using three different outcome configurations. Model 1 considers the likelihood of marrying a U.S. native versus marrying an immigrant from a different country compared with the odds of marrying within one’s own immigrant group (the reference category). With the exception of Qian et al  (2012), however, previous studies have paid little attention to alternative paths of marital assimilation. Skin color is measured using an interviewer-assigned scale that ranges from 1 (lightest) to 11 (darkest). 