5b), which correlated well in both time course and magnitude with the data reported in Fig. Tyrosine phosphorylation of Cbl enhances binding to SH2 or SH3 domain-containing proteins such as phosphatidylinositol 3 (PI-3) kinase and PLC-γ (Odai et al  1995). PI-3 kinase activation results in increased synthesis of phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-trisphosphate (PIP3) and phosphatidyl 3,4-bisphosphate. Following formation of a tethered attachment to the substrate, we speculate that β2-integrin engagement initiates tyrosine kinase-mediated phosphorylation of Cbl and subsequent activation of PLCγ to produce IP3 and mobilization of Ca2+ from internal stores. Many types of signaling molecules activate eosinophils, including specific cytokines (IL-5, IL-3, and GM-CSF), secretory IgA (sIgA), IgG-coated objects, lipoxygenase products such as leuko-triene B4, and lipid mediators including platelet activating factor (Abu-Ghazaleh et al  1992; Bankers-Fulbright et al  2004; Rothenberg and Hogan 2006). Alpha calf serum was purchased from HyClone Laboratories (Logan, UT). PKCζ myristoylated pseudosubstrate was purchased from Calbiochem (San Diego, CA). Each stimulus has a distinct signaling pattern, and whether or not these stimuli use common pathways to activate eosinophils remains an active area of investigation. Heparinized blood was collected from atopic and nonatopic volunteers and an equal volume of PIPES buffered solution was added (25 mM PIPES, 50 mM NaCl, 5 mM KCl, 25 mM NaOH, 5.4 mM glucose, pH 7.4). After incubation, the cell mixture was diluted with PIPES buffered solution and 1% calf serum and eluted through a steel-wool column suspended in a strong magnet. Intracellular [Ca2+] MeasurementsEosinophils were plated onto chamber slides that allowed for perfusion and ratio imaging. Eosinophils were washed with HBSS containing 10 mM glucose, 10 mM HEPES, pH 7.4. The chamber slide was perfused with HBSS (2 ml/min) at 25°C. For multiple comparisons with a common control, data were analyzed using a one-way ANOVA followed by Dunnett’s test. Activation of plasma membrane NADPH oxidase is responsible for the extracellular generation of superoxide anions (Bankers-Fulbright et al  2001; Someya et al  1997). Eosinophil granules contain toxic proteins that are thought to play an important role in the pathogenesis of asthma and other allergic diseases involving eosinophilic inflammation (Denzler et al  2001; Walsh 2001). 