However, individuals on a higher dose of methadone showed greater OFC activation (r=0.71, p<0.05; see Fig. Although this was a post hoc analysis, it was hypothesis-led, and therefore restricted to four key regions of interest: orbitofrontal cortex (OFC), anterior cingulate cortex (ACC), amygdala and insula. In particular, the dose-dependent activation of the left OFC in methadone users, as shown in Fig. The OFC has been widely regarded as a key brain region for the detection of changing reinforcement contingencies that signal the need for changes in behavioural responding (Kringelbach 2005; Rolls 2000). Taken together, our findings are consistent with the notion that opiate users, regardless of the opioid used, are failing to utilize feedback information to adjust ongoing behaviour. Our findings have also shown that different types of opioids affect orbitofrontal function differentially during decision-making, although decision-making behaviour itself was not measurably impaired. We acknowledge that the present study constituted a post hoc analysis and that the block design and small group size limit our interpretations. In the methadone group, one sample was additionally positive for amphetamine, four were positive for cocaine and two were positive for benzodiazepines. Urine analyses of controls were negative for all substances. All participants gave written informed consent prior to participation and received monetary compensation for taking part in the study. Scanning procedure and materialsPrior to the positron emission tomography (PET) scans, a T1-weighted MRI scan was acquired from each participant. Each scan provided an image of regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) integrated for 90 s from the time when the tracer first enters the cerebral circulation. Each decision risked a certain number of points associated with the colours red and blue on that particular trial. Reward values (90:10, 80:20, 70:30, 60:40 and 50:50 points) and colour ratios of the boxes (5:1, 4:2 and 3:3 boxes) changed from one trial to another. On trials with uneven probabilities and outcome values, the least likely option was always associated with the higher reward value. Since the likely small reward options and risky large reward options were mutually exclusive, we only included the choices of the likely option in our analysis. These regions were then subject to post hoc t tests implemented in SPSS (see Table 2). Demographic and drug-use dataDescriptive group characteristics are shown in Table 1. Overall, participants preferred the likely option to the risky one. 