Time-lapse images were acquired every 30 seconds for 3 hours with a Zeiss Axiovert 405M microscope using a 100× oil-immersion objective. The dorsal columns of adult female Sprague-Dawley rats were crushed at the level of C8 and a population of injured sensory neurons was traced over a period of two days via dextran-Texas Red labeling of the sciatic nerve. Spinal cord tissue was harvested at 2, 4, 7, 14, and 28 days post-lesion and the distances between the ends of the labeled fibers and the center of the lesions were measured (Fig. The environment of a spinal cord lesion is extremely complex. Astrocytes are an integral component of the glial scar following injury to the CNS. They are present in high numbers and extensively contact regenerating axons. A dorsal column crush lesion was then made by inserting Dumont # 3 jeweler's forceps into the dorsal spinal cord at C8 to a depth of 1.0 mm and squeezing the forceps, holding pressure for ten seconds and repeating two additional times. The muscle layers were sutured with 4-0 nylon suture, and the skin was closed with surgical staples. This movie was made from 100× phase images taken every 30 seconds.Movie S2: Time-lapse movie of dystrophic adult DRG neurons cultured on an inverse aggrecan/laminin gradient. This movie was made from 100× phase images taken every 30 sec.Movie S4: Time-lapse movie of dystrophic adult DRG neurons cultured on an inverse aggrecan/laminin gradient. Post-operatively, animals were kept warm with a heating lamp during recovery from anesthesia and allowed access to food and water ad libitum. This movie was made from 100× phase images taken every 30 sec. Animals were killed at 2, 4, 7, 14, or 28 days post-lesion (N=3 per group). Components of the glial scar, such as highly sulfated proteoglycans, Ephs, slits, and myelin membrane fragments (Filbin, 2003; Silver and Miller, 2004; Harel and Strittmatter, 2006; Yiu and He, 2006; Busch and Silver, 2007; Xie and Zheng, 2008) as well as the process of neuroinflammation (Donnelly and Popovich, 2008) all contribute to regeneration failure. Clodronate was encapsulated in liposomes as described previously (Van Rooijen and Sanders, 1994). Briefly, the sciatic nerve of the right hindlimb was exposed and crushed with Dumont #3 forceps for tens seconds and repeated two additional times. Post-operatively, animals were kept warm with a heating lamp during recovery from anesthesia and allowed access to food and water ad libitum. Tissue was then stained with anti-GFAP (Accurate Chemical and Scientific Corporation, Westbury, NY), anti-ED-1 (Millipore, Billerica, MA) and incubated with Alexafluor-405 or Alexafluor-488 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) respectively, and then imaged on a Zeiss Axiovert 510 laser-scanning confocal microscope. Both the central and peripheral roots were removed and ganglia were incubated in a solution of Collagenase II (200 U/mL, Worthington) and Dispase II (2.5 U/mL, Roche) in HBSS. Briefly, a single hole was drilled through the upper half of the side wall of each dish with a number 2 bit to create a port for the addition of cells to the cultures during time-lapse microscopy. The hole created was sufficiently large enough to allow passage of a 20 ga. needle while small enough to prevent media leakage. Dishes were then rinsed with sterile water and coated with poly-l-lysine (0.1 mg/mL, Sigma) overnight at room temperature, rinsed with sterile water and allowed to dry. After the aggrecan spots dried completely, the entire surface of the dish was bathed in laminin solution (10 ug/mL, BTI, Stoughton, MA) in HBSS-CMF for three hours at 37 degrees Celsius. The laminin bath was then removed immediately before plating of cells. The supernatant was removed and the pellet containing bone marrow precursor cells was resuspended and plated in DMEM additionally supplemented with 20% LADMAC cell line-conditioned media (generous gift of Dr. Clifford Harding) to induce differentiation into macrophages. In experiments involving “activated primary macrophages”, cells were stimulated with 2 ng/ml interferon-gamma (generous gift of Dr. Clifford Harding) and 20 ug/ml LPS (Sigma) or interferon-gamma alone for 1 day prior to use in time-lapse to elevate the activation state of the cells. Cortical Astrocyte PreparationCortical astrocytes were harvested from the cortices of P0-P1 rats. 