In this chapter, we will describe the methods to determine gene expression by using RT-PCR and real-time PCR. 1) and analyzed by Quantity One.To semi-quantify the expression level of mRNA, intensities of target gene products are normalized to that of housekeeping gene to obtain the relative densities. RT-PCR as a relatively simple, inexpensive, extremely sensitive and specific tool to determine the expression level of target genes. When this probe is intact and excited by a light source, the Reporter dye's emission is suppressed by the Quencher dye as a result of the close proximity of the dyes. When the probe is cleaved by the 5′ nuclease activity of the enzyme, the distance between the Reporter and the Quencher increases causing the transfer of energy to stop. The fluorescent emissions of the reporter increase and the quencher decrease. When SYBR Green dye binds to double-stranded DNA, the intensity of the fluorescent emissions increases. Store at room temperature.Isopropanol. The study of gene expression in a cell or tissue at a particular moment gives an insight into the capacity of the cell for protein synthesis. Store at 2–8°C.Thermal cycler (Mastercycler, Eppendorf, Westbury, NY). Store at −20°C.GoTaq® DNA Polymerase with 5× reaction buffer. Among these techniques, Northern blot analysis remains a standard method for detection and quantitation of mRNA levels despite the advent of more robust techniques. Although it is convenient, time-saving, and avoids contact with phenol/chloroform using commercially available kits, those kits using silica-membrane spin columns may not be ideal for studies of insoluble nanoparticle since the nanoparticles may clog the membrane pore of the spin column. Mix well.Measure the absorbance at 260 and 280 nm with a Spectrophotometer (DU 730 Spectrophotometer, Beckman Coulter, Fullerton, CA) (see Notes 18–21). Although there are many kits commercially available for RT, the reverse transcriptase used in those kits usually is M-MLV reverse transcriptase from the Moloney murine leukemia virus or AMV reverse transcriptase from the avian myeloblastosis virus. Since M-MLV reverse transcriptase is less processive than AMV reverse transcriptase, therefore, more units of the M-MLV enzyme are required to generate the same amount of cDNA as in the AMV reaction (2). 