To further confirm our observations in BMDMs, we extended these ex vivo experiments to in vitro using RAW264.7 macrophages. LL-37 is the sole member of the human cathelicidin family, and has a murine ortholog, cathelicidin-related antimicrobial peptide (CRAMP). LL-37/CRAMP has piqued great research interest for its dual role in modulating microbiota and immune response in several infectious diseases and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) [13–15]. Hepatic inflammation is a hallmark of ALD development. Alcohol exposure reduces antimicrobial peptide expression and causes intestinal bacterial dysbiosis, immune dysregulation, and gut barrier dysfunction, which, in turn, leads to increased endotoxin release and hepatic bacterial translocation that activate TLR-4 on Kupffer cells and causes liver inflammation. Alcohol exposure induces gut dysbiosis, which is largely attributed to the reduced expression of antimicrobial factors. Reg3 lectins represent an important family of gut-derived AMPs, and depleting Reg3b and Reg3g exacerbated, while increasing Reg3g expression attenuated, gut dysbiosis and alcohol-induced liver injury [9]. Our recent study demonstrated that intestinal HIF-1α plays an important role in maintaining gut microbiota homeostasis and gut barrier function by activating barrier-protecting factors, such as CRAMP, β-defensins, cluster of differentiation 73 (CD73), and claudin-1. At the genus level, we found that Akkermansia was decreased in Camp−/− mice. Alcohol treatment increased hepatic but decreased intestinal CRAMP expression in mice. UA metabolism is regulated by multiple mechanisms. Mice were maintained at 22 °C with a 12 h light/dark cycle and had free access to a normal chow diet and tap water. Alcohol consumption causes dysbiosis and ‘leaky gut’, which allows the translocation of bacteria and its products through the portal vein to the liver, resulting in damage to the liver cells and the development of hepatic steatosis and liver injury through the toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4)-mediated pathway [4,5]. StatisticsStatistical analyses were performed using the statistical computer package GraphPad Prism version 6 (GraphPad Software Inc, San Diego, CA, USA), MS Excel 2016 (Microsoft Corp, Redmond, WA, USA) or SPSS 26.0 (IBM, Chicago, IL, USA). Statistical comparisons were made using two-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) with Tukey’s post hoc test or Student’s t-test, where appropriate. One of the most important mechanisms maintaining gut microbiota homeostasis is antimicrobial peptide (AMP)-mediated regulation. Alcohol feeding increased hepatic fat accumulation in both WT and Camp−/− mice, but much more severe macrosteatosis was found in Camp−/− mice (Figure 2B), which was then confirmed by Oil Red O staining of frozen liver sections (Figure 2B). Inflammation is a hallmark of ALD in animal models and human subjects [30,31]. Previous studies have demonstrated the critical role of AMPs in the pathogenesis of ALD [9–11]. 