Previous studies on LAMPs trafficking using biochemical and immunofluorescence approaches had suggestedthat LAMPs canreach thelysosomevia twointracellular routes: a direct pathway from the Golgi to the late endosomes and lysosomes22,23, and an indirect pathway from the Golgi to the plasma membrane following the secretory pathway, and then to lysosomes via endocytosis24-26. Although it was initially considered that the pool of LAMPs at the plasma membrane was only evident under certain conditions (such as platelet activation or certain tumors), later studies knocking down adaptor trafficking proteins demonstrated that a portion of cellular LAMPs can be detected at the plasma membrane even under normal physiological conditions (reviewed in ref. In fact, analysis of chimera proteins of the luminal region of LAMP-1 and the three different cytosolic tails of LAMP-2 revealed that the variants reaching the plasma membrane were mainly LAMP-2A and LAMP-2B (ref. Although the combined use of surface biotinylation and cellular permeabilization helped to demonstrate that some membrane LAMPs are internalized, it was not possible to determine which fraction of the total LAMPs transits through the plasma membrane in a dynamic manner. LAMP-2A is encoded by a spliced variant of the lamp2 gene and acts as a lysosomal receptor for chaperone-mediated autophagy (CMA)8,9. LAMP-2A is sorted to endosomes and lysosomes through a tyrosine-based signal in its cytosolic C terminus, but a fraction of the protein is also observed at the plasma membrane10. We determined that the red-to-blue ratio for medium-FT had small changes in the pH range of 5.4-7.4 (Fig. The fast-FT has five amino acid mutations as compared to the original mCherry. Development of monomeric FTsThe gene encoding mCherry was used as a template for the multiple saturated mutagenesis at positions 42, 44, 65, 69, 106, 148, 203 and 224 (amino acid numbering follows that of Aequorea victoria GFP; see Fig. Lysine or arginine amino acids are almost always found at this position in RFPs14. Therefore Arg69 and Trp84 appear to be the key amino acids responsible for the timing behavior of the mCherry-based blue-to-red FTs. On the other hand, the difference between the ages of LAMP-2A proteins in the Golgi and those at the plasma membrane is small, which suggests that LAMP-2A is present there for a rather limited time. This conclusion is based on the following: if LAMP-2A travels from the Golgi to early endosomes and then recycles between endosomes and the plasma membrane, we should see two populations of endosomes with the different ages of LAMP-2A-FT. Consequently, a quite small fraction of LAMP-2A is involved in the recycling between the plasma membrane and endosomes. MutagenesisThe gene encoding mCherry was PCR amplified as a BglII-EcoRI fragment and inserted into a pBAD/His-B vector (Invitrogen). To determine extinction coefficients, we relied on measuring the mature chromophore concentrations35, taking into account that the extinction coefficient of the model compound of the tyrosine-containing GFP-like chromophores is 44,000 M-1 cm-1 at 447 nm in 1 M NaOH35 and about 28,500 M-1 cm-1 at 382 nm in 1 M HCl36. These models were based on the proposed earlier mechanism for the chromophore formation in tetrameric DsRed protein6. Consequently, the mCherry K69R mutant was used as a template for random mutagenesis aimed to screen for medium-FT and slow-FT phenotypes. The most suitable templates for this appear to be the monomeric variants of DsRed7. This model was based on the proposed earlier mechanism for chromophore formation in tetrameric DsRed protein6. The mature deprotonated (anionic) R-form contains an additional double bond between the α carbon and amide nitrogen of Met65. 