The lack of involvement of POLβ and XRCC1 in 5-FU responsiveness is striking given their prominent role in the later steps of BER. Nonetheless, Fischer et al  showed at least in HeLa cells that siRNA against UNG2 conferred resistance to FdUrd [71], offering evidence in support of the futile cycling model.The prediction of the BER futile cycling model is that restraining UDG-initiated BER would protect against the toxicity of TS inhibition. To our knowledge, no studies have simultaneously manipulated UDG and dUTPase activity in mammalian cells to test whether tolerance of genomic uracil occurs as a means of developing resistance to TS inhibitors. The second step of MMR involves recognition of the bound MutSα by a second heterodimer (MLH1:PMS2, also known as MutLα). It remains debated as to the relative contribution of each of these cellular targets to the anti-tumor activity and side effects seen in patients. However, from the limited biochemical evidence available, FdUTP is incorporated opposite adenine. Third, there are interesting links among S-phase checkpoint signaling and the HR machinery. Evidence clearly indicates that products of 5-FU metabolism can affect intracellular nucleotide pools, and ultimately lead to the incorporation of “false” bases, i.e. Because 5-FU is a structural analog of uracil and thymine, many of the enzymes that participate in uracil or thymine metabolism also effectively metabolize 5-FU, topics that have been extensively studied and previously reviewed [10]. Thymidine phosphorylase can also salvage 5-FU into the deoxynucleoside, FdUrd. The enzyme dUTP pyrophosphatase (dUTPase) performs an absolutely essential function to prevent genomic uracil incorporation by catalyzing the hydrolysis of dUTP into dUMP (Figure 2); E. coli and S. cerevisiae lacking dUTPase are inviable [11,12]. Loss of this feedback inhibition presumably increases the conversion of FdUrd to FdUMP by TK and the conversion of FUDP to FdUDP by RNR. hydrolytic deamination of cytosine (giving rise to U:G pairs) and incorporation of dUMP during replication (generating U:A pairs), reviewed elsewhere in detail [29]. Briefly, the UNG genetic locus encodes mitochondrial (UNG1) and nuclear (UNG2) forms of UDGs, with UNG2 appearing to account for the bulk of cellular UDG activity [29]. In this study, both the bacterial and human (presumably UNG2) UDG was found to excise 5-FU, albeit with slightly less efficiency than uracil, from plasmid substrates harboring multiple tritium-labeled base lesions. Most notably, 5-FU is routinely employed in the management of colorectal cancer via one of two FDA-approved first line combinatorial chemotherapy regimes, abbreviated FOLFOX and FOLFIRI, which involve intravenous administration of the fluorinated base analog (Figure 1). Yet surprisingly, several investigations have concluded using various approaches that UNG does not influence the cytotoxicity of 5-FU [37-39]. In addition, defects in MMR are associated with hereditary non-polyposis colorectal cancer (HNPCC), i.e. cancers characterized by high microsatellite instability (MSI-H) [43], and mutations in the MBD4 gene have been reported in human colorectal cancers found to exhibit MSI-H [44-46]. 