The SSPR is then calculated by multiplying this constant concentration in μg/liter by the collection medium flow rate in liter/min and then dividing the result by the glove piece area in cm2 contacted by the collection medium. The 2012 standard also defines the SSPR in an open-loop system as when measured permeation rate values for samples at 5-min intervals have less than 5% relative standard deviation, with the average of four consecutive measurements being the SSPR. In studies using volume replacement with solvent after sampling, accurate results may not occur when mixing or solubility are inadequate. The minimum number of chemotherapy agents to be tested is nine. Higher SSPRs were found for ISO cells. The SSPR data depended on collection gas flow rate. [9] The United States (U.S.) Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has strategies for estimating dermal exposure and the use of personal protective equipment (PPE). Since harmonization of EN and ISO is already occurring, harmonization will be faster if fewer countries have to change their statutes.Whole glove permeationThe permeation standards discussed above are convenient because users can choose the permeation temperature and only a piece of the glove is needed for testing. [37,38]The scientific literature of whole glove permeation is described next, all studies being at room temperature unless specified otherwise.Williams in 1981[39] measured breakthrough times at 3 μg/cm2/min and permeation rates of 1,4-dichloro-2-butene that was sprayed at a motionless whole glove (8 different glove types) on a stainless steel tubing artificial hand. [10] The American Industrial Hygiene Association from 2008–2011 did have a Biological Environmental Exposure Level Project Team for skin risk assessment. The stains appeared on an inner white cotton glove (sensitivity was at the microgram level) and were detected fastest at the points where the greatest hand pressure was exerted on the contaminated handle of a screwdriver used in the work activity.A 1990 study of chemotherapeutic drugs through a surgical latex disposable whole glove at 37 °C featured a modified Franz permeation cell with a pneumatic flexion feature that produced no significant difference in NBTs but doubled the calculated diffusion coefficient for cyclophosphamide relative to no flexion. KCP, using an open-loop gas collection method at room temperature, reported a NBT for limonene of 105 min for this glove. However, the cyclohexanol and limonene ASTM moving tray data at 35 °C were not statistically different at p ≤ 0.05 from the corresponding clenching/non-clenching dextrous robot hand data for the thicker disposable nitrile gloves, indicating adequacy of the ASTM moving tray method at 35 °C to predict permeation up to clenching forces of 1.8 kg. The Phalen data did show decreases in NBT and increases for SSPR for hand movement when disposable nitrile gloves were challenged with ethanol. A common directive in safety data sheets is to “Use the appropriate glove”, something that has to be determined by a professional who needs to understand the factors involved and to employ “professional judgment.” Part of the latter involves the application of past history to current practice. Thin gloves allow more facile manipulation of work pieces and greater wearer comfort than the thicker ones of the same material. [2,15–22] Permeation may occur without any observable effects on glove materials. The mathematical model for non-Fickian diffusion is much more complex with D no longer simply related to L2, but to variables related to materials being non-isotropic and the inner structure of each material. 