This analysis demonstrates that ICL expression selectively decreases inhibitory input relative to glutamatergic excitatory input onto optic tectal neurons.Most GABAAR contain a binding site for benzodiazepines that is located at the interface of the γ2 and α subunits (Wallace et al , 2001; Sigel, 2002). Because distal dendrites are more dynamic than primary dendrites over the 2 hr imaging period (Cline, 2001; Hua and Smith, 2004), we focused our analysis on branch dynamics of secondary and higher order dendrites. Using micropipettes with ∼ 1 µm tip diameter filled with plasmid (3 – 6 µg/µl DNA in ddH2O), we applied stimuli of 1 – 2 µA with 1 s trains of 1 ms square pulses at 200 Hz frequency. The dendritic distribution of EGFP-ICL in puncta apposed to VGAT positive puncta suggests that ICL accumulates at GABAergic postsynaptic sites, consistent with previous reports in cultured neurons (Essrich et al , 1998; Kittler et al , 2000; Meier and Grantyn, 2004) and in brain sections (Crestani et al , 1999; Schweizer et al , 2003). ICL-expressing tectal neurons do not show diazepam - mediated increases of GABAergic responses, consistent with the idea that residual synaptic GABAAR in ICL-expressing neurons lack the γ2 subunit, and that the remaining GABAergic synaptic transmission might be mediated by γ2 subunit - lacking receptors (Essrich et al , 1998), possibly γ3 subunit - containing receptors (Baer et al , 1999). GABAergic synaptic transmission is required for dendritic arbor growthUsing this tool, we probed the role of inhibitory GABAAR - dependent synaptic transmission on dendritic arbor development and structural plasticity, by visualizing the cell - autonomous effects of ICL expression in single tectal neurons in the intact X. laevis brain, at a developmental time when GABAergic transmission is inhibitory (Akerman and Cline, 2006). Inhibition is required for experience - dependent structural plasticityThe Xenopus retinotectal system demonstrates rapid experience - dependent structural plasticity that can be detected as in increase in the rate of dendritic arbor growth rate with a relatively brief exposure of 4 hrs to enhanced visual stimulation (Sin et al , 2002). Blots were blocked in 5% non-fat milk with 0.1% TBS and TritonX-100, (Sigma) and incubated with primary antibodies diluted in blocking solution. Blots were rinsed and either incubated with biotinylated anti-rabbit Ig (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ) with HRP-conjugated streptavidin (Amersham Biosciences) or directly with HRP-linked mouse IgG. Antibodies used were: rabbit polyclonal GABAAR γ2, rabbit polyclonal VGAT (Synaptic Systems, Germany), goat polyclonal GABAAR α2 (sc-7350, Santa Cruz, CA) and mouse monoclonal anti-GFP (Rockland, Gilbertsville, PA). Sections were rinsed and incubated in secondary antibodies (in 0.1% TritonX -100): Alexa Fluor 568/633 goat anti rabbit, Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-mouse/rabbit (Invitrogen, Eugene, OR). Brain sections selected for confocal imaging correspond to an approximate 100 µm depth from brain surface.To quantify the distribution of immunoreactivity, fluorescent intensity profiles were measured along dendrites and across somata with ImageJ (W. Rasband, NIH, Bethesda, MD). Custom software written in Matlab (Mathworks, Natick, MA) was used for colocalization and shift analyses. Average segment lengths (ASL) were determined by measuring distances between branch tips and branch points, the starting point is the first branch point of the primary dendrite. Recordings were accepted for analysis from cells in which the series resistance did not change over 10% and input resistance (0.7 – 2 GΩ) remained relatively constant. Five minute periods of mIPSC or mEPSC recordings were analyzed with the Synaptosoft Mini Analysis Program. Data are presented as individual data points or as mean ± s.e.m., unless otherwise noted. 1C, right panel) indicating the γ2 subunit is expressed in the midbrain of tadpole. These data indicate that the GABAAR γ2 subunit is present in the optic tectum of X. laevis. 