These data support the hypothesis that leptin has a stimulatory effect on HuH-28 cell migration, which is one of the characteristics of malignant cholangiocytes (1).Incubation with GCDC induced apoptosis in HuH-28 cholangiocarcinoma cells. It remains unknown, however, whether leptin directly regulate cholangiocarcinoma cell growth. In this study, thioacetamide dissolved in tap water at 0.03% was chronically administrated to the animals groups for a 24-week period. Here, we showed the presence of leptin and leptin receptors in cholangiocytes and showed that increasing doses of leptin stimulate HuH-28 (e.g., intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma) cell proliferation in vitro in a dose-dependent manner up to 48 hours of incubation. Subsequently, we have shown that the stimulatory effect of leptin in cholangiocarcinoma cell growth was blocked by preincubation with AG490 and PD98059, respectively, JAK/STAT and MEK inhibitor, thus supporting the hypothesis that leptin, through stimulation of its own receptors, activates several intracellular mechanisms, among them JAK/STAT3 and ERK1/2, which lead to an increase of cholangiocarcinoma cell proliferation. The role played by STAT3 and ERK1/2 in regulating malignant cholangiocyte growth has been described (18, 45). Cytoselect Cell Migration Assay kit was purchased by Cell Biolabs, Inc. Cytoselect Cell Migration Assay kit was purchased by Cell Biolabs, Inc. This intriguing data suggests that malignant cholangiocytes could produce leptin, which contributes to modulate their own proliferation by an autocrine/ paracrine mechanism. To check for RNA integrity, we used primers specific for human β actin (sense, 5′-GAAATCGTGCGTGACATTAAG-3′; antisense, 5′CTAGAAGCATTTGCGTTGGACGATGGAGGGGC-3′). We performed immunoblots as previously described (17, 18). We used the Cytoselect Cell Migration Assay kit according to the instructions given by the vendor. Animals were housed for 2 additional wk in a temperature-controlled environment (20–22°C) with a 12-h light-dark cycle and with free access to drinking water and to standard rat diet. Morphologic Analysis of Liver TissuesAnimal liver tissues were fixed in formalin, embedded in paraffin, processed for histopathology, stained with H&E for routine examination or with CK19 for tumor visualization, and examined by light microscopy. Tumor sections (n = 4), obtained from each group of animals, were stained for c-Neu as previously described (17, 24, 25). After examination of the staining with a microscope, photographs of 4 different fields per section (selected in number of 10 from each animal in a blinded, random fashion) were taken. HuH-28 cells were incubated in FBS-free medium with and without leptin (40 ng/mL) for 48 h. Western blot on protein extracts was performed as previously described (17, 18). Expression of leptin receptors and leptin in cholangiocytesImmortalized normal human cholangiocyte H69 cells and Mz-ChA-1, HuH28, and TFK-1 human cholangiocarcinoma cell lines expressed bands corresponding to a common sequence present in both short and long OBR isoforms, and to short and long isoforms of leptin receptor by RT-PCR (Fig. Such an effect reached its highest after 15 minutes of incubation (Fig. 