She eats lunch in the dining room from 11:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. and then returns home. I note she spends time in the recliner watching television and naps between 7:48 p.m. and 8:16 p.m. (sensors were almost completely quiet—not activated by movement—during this time): A supervised approach to training the algorithm includes setting clear rules that the computer must follow. Expert-guided supervised learning techniques result in more robust and efficacious algorithms. Expert-guided supervised learning techniques result in more robust and efficacious algorithms. This limits our ability to compare the rigor of our interpretations with other teams. These discoveries could lead to more efficacious technology-enabled health-assistive devices. These discoveries could lead to more efficacious technology-enabled health-assistive devices. It should also include community stakeholders (e.g., senior living industry, retirement communities). Monitoring functional decline is important because falls related to functional decline may result in emergency department visits (Dermody et al , 2017), and subsequent hospital admissions which are costly (Hines et al , 2014; World Health Organization, 2018). Sensor timestamps allow tracking of a resident’s sequential movement throughout the home. Knowledge impacts the development of a system (Motta et al , 1989). Effective systems rely on human abilities for gleaning, processing, and filtering information so the system can be trained to emulate the decision-making of a human expert, and act intentionally (Jackson, 1998; Russell & Norvig, 2003). Additionally, computer scientists must learn about health conditions and the human response to those conditions, and how that response may influence activity and behavior patterns. A shared responsibility exists for each scientific discipline to gain a certain level of comfort with each other’s knowledge domain. Health experiences are captured through weekly nursing interviews using semi-structured questions that regard health or status changes in the preceding 7 days. When an event has occurred (e.g., a fall, an episode of RLS), in addition to describing the activities the resident was engaging in around the time of the event, we observe the naturalistic setting in which the health event occurred (i.e., the home). For the AI agent to act upon changes (i.e. Health technologies are designed to assist with solving real-world health problems that humans experience. To explicate the role of contextualized qualitative data, one must first understand the characteristics of sensor-based data.Quantitative smart home data.In developing a smart home AI agent, quantitative data are subject to computational analysis and are, in their original form, a string of alphanumeric characters (e.g., a single line of data looks like “2019-02-08 00:24:24.700575 BedroomAArea ON”; for multiple lines of data see Figure 2). As such, the development of these technologies requires situational, naturalistic knowledge along with the strongest possible phenomenological explanation to ensure the technology can meet the human’s health needs. Anne lives in a 600 square foot single bedroom, single bath, open floorplan apartment (Figure 1, Left). In my mind I acknowledge her interest in participating in the study and her desire to fulfill, what appears to be, a personal need to continue giving back to society. 