Conversely, women risk the diversion of critical resources by their partner towards other women and their children. Future studies that focus on a smaller number of populations or look at intra-community variation could utilize more fine-grained variables. Another potential problem with using Likert scales is the possibility that raters will be biased towards extreme responding. Using Likert responses on other types of moral transgressions collected for another study in seven of the populations in our sample, we find no evidence that extreme responding systematically affected our results (Supplementary Fig. Finally, while efforts were made to collect data on a broad swath of each population, we used convenience samples, and as such, they are not necessarily representative of the populations at large. In addition, variation could be the result of sample variation in characteristics such age or marital status. Our results point to the importance of studying universals and variation in conjunction with one another. 10-000238/#10-000253) covering work in Los Angeles, Namibia, China, Japan and India; California State University Fullerton for work in Ecuador (no. 2016-2377) for work in Nicaragua; Arizona State University (no. 00002770) for work in Fiji; University of New Mexico (no. 10-034) for work in Bolivia; University of Washington (no. 46690) for work in Indonesia; and University of Nevada Las Vegas (no. All other interviews were conducted in person by an anthropologist and/or, where necessary, local translators who worked as part of the research team. Most samples were evenly split between men and women and included a large proportion of married individuals (Fig. Here, we report the results of predictors run individually, but results using a combination of predictors are shown in Supplementary Fig. Full model details are available in the Supplementary Information. Full model details are available in the Supplementary Information. Reporting Summary.Further information on research design is available in the Nature Research Reporting Summary linked to this article. We found that levels of paternal investment were strongly associated with jealous response to sexual infidelity, but had a smaller and more uncertain effect on respondent’s views of emotional infidelity (Fig. Increased levels of paternal provisioning were associated with harsher views of male sexual infidelity (β = −0.69, 89% PI = −1.24 to −0.16, β(pr < 0) = 97.9%), but not female infidelity (β = −0.30, 89% PI = −0.94 to 0.34, β(pr < 0) = 78.7%) where again the distribution of the predictor overlaps substantially with zero. 3), varying little across the models. 