Initially, intestinal tissue samples must be homogenized. It is therefore not appropriate for study of intestinal colonization factors. These models include dogs (Sack et al , 1966), chinchillas (Blachman et al , 1974), guinea pigs (Freter, 1956), gnotobiotic/antibiotic treated adult mice (Miller et al , 1972; Nygren et al , 2009), zebrafish (Runft et al , 2014) and fruit flies (Blow et al , 2005). Furthermore, this surgical model requires specialized equipment and training, and the closed nature of a ligated ileal loop lacks several important aspects of GI tract physiology, e.g. When working with different litters, it is essential to change gloves in-between as the adult may reject or even attack her kits due to the foreign smell. Also kit size and feeding success varies within the litter. In addition, all experiments should be repeated with sufficient animals from multiple litters to correct for host differences. To obtain CFU counts that accurately reflect the bacterial loads in vivo, it is important to limit the amount of time between euthanasia, dissection, homogenization and finally CFU plating. Due to the same reasons, it is essential to avoid heating the tissue samples during their homogenization. An experiment is entirely dependent on the delivery date of infant rabbits. Follow all appropriate guidelines and regulations for the use and handling of pathogenic microorganisms. Well-fed kits have a pronounced, pear-shaped body and show a ‘milk-spot’ (i.e., the milk filled stomach that is visible as a lighter region through the skin). The bundle-forming toxin coregulated pilus (TCP) is V. cholerae’s chief colonization factor (Taylor et al , 1987), but many other gene products also facilitate the pathogen’s growth in the host intestine (Ritchie and Waldor, 2009). Do not use strong pressure while inserting the catheter and if resistance is felt, it is best to pull the catheter back a few millimeters before inserting it further. Do not use strong pressure while inserting the catheter and if resistance is felt, it is best to pull the catheter back a few millimeters before inserting it further. V. cholerae secretes cholera toxin (CT) in the intestine, and the action of this A-B5 type toxin causes the secretory diarrhea characteristic of cholera, primarily by stimulating chloride release from enterocytes into the intestinal lumen (Sears and Kaper, 1996). After a short incubation time (about 5 min), take out the instruments and let them dry by air.Grab the navel mark with the tissue forceps and make a small incision through the skin and peritoneal wall with the dissection scissors (Fig. Detach the gut by severing the remaining connections of connective tissue and transfer the entire tissue to a clean dissection board. However, at the end stage of the disease the majority of cecal content has been excreted and very little fluid can be recovered.Disentangle the gut and align it on the dissection board.Find the beginning of the duodenum (Fig. 4E).Grab the tip of the cecum with the small angled forceps and separate the furrowed part of the cecum from the colon using scissors (Fig. 