Five days old flies were transferred to empty vials and temperature was raised to 38°C by submerging vials in a controlled-temperature water bath. We defined paralysis as a condition when a fly was paralyzed and unable to walk or keep standing position for at least 1 minute. These two assays were compared in a number of experiments, which indicated that the assays produce consistent results and have similar sensitivity. We measured its kinetic parameters for a number of substrates, including several types of sialic acid and structurally similar molecules found in various organisms. The kinetics for Neu5Gc showed no saturation, so we could only estimate that the Km for Neu5Gc was > 3.5 mM (Fig. Similar to the Drosophila enzyme, HsCSAS could not utilize KDO as a substrate (Fig. The DmCSAS-DA protein was unable to rescue the phenotype (Fig. Our results suggested that insect and vertebrate CMP-Sia synthetases are regulated by different molecular and cellular mechanisms, which shed light on evolutionary adaptation of these proteins to distinct subcellular environments. Materials and reagentsSugars, nucleotides, mouse anti-FLAG antibody and FLAG affinity beads (anti-FLAG M2 affinity gel) were purchased from Sigma. Surprisingly, our sequence alignments revealed that the first D in this motif is not conserved and is substituted with E in insect CSAS sequences (Fig. The level of expression, subcellular localization and glycosylation of this mutant were all similar to those of the wildtype protein, which strongly suggested that DmCSAS-DA was normally expressed and properly folded (Fig. Drosophila strains with GAL4 drivers were obtained from the Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center (Indiana University, Bloomington, IN). Expression constructs, site-directed mutagenesis and cloningThe UAS-CSAS-FLAG expression construct for in vivo expression was described previously [8]. For generating the CSAS-DA mutant, we used a PCR-based site-specific mutagenesis protocol [10] and changed the codon 228, GAC to GCC, which resulted in D228A mutation in the CSAS protein. For generating the CSAS-DA mutant, we used a PCR-based site-specific mutagenesis protocol [10] and changed the codon 228, GAC to GCC, which resulted in D228A mutation in the CSAS protein. For transient and stable transfections, we used Ca2+-phosphate protocol as previously described [11] or Effectene reagent (Qiagen) according to manufacturer’s protocol. The cells were lysed by sonication, using Branson Sonifier® 150. Lysis was completed by rocking vials on nutator for 20 min. To isolate FLAG-tagged proteins, 20 μl of anti-FLAG affinity beads (Sigma), prewashed in Lysis buffer, were added per 1 ml of lysate. The reaction was mixed, centrifuged immediately for 30 sec at 3,000 rpm, and then 100 μl of supernatant was withdrawn and kept at −20°C as a sample corresponding to zero-time point. Reaction was stopped by transferring reaction tubes on ice for 5 min, followed by centrifugation through 10K Amicon Ultra spin filter (Merck Millipore) to remove beads and protein content. Briefly, components of reaction mixture were separated on a 4 × 250 mm CarboPac PA-1 column (Dionex) using Ultimate3000 HPLC system (Thermo) equipped with variable wavelength detector VWD-3100. The concentration of the product of enzymatic conversion of MESG substrate was detected with Ultrospec 2000 spectrophotometer (Pharmacia Biotech) at 360 nm. PPi concentrations were calculated with calibration curve plotted using PPi standards.We tested the effect of different components of CMP-Sia synthetase reaction on EnzChek-mediated detection and found that Cu2+, Co2+, Ni2+, Mn2+, Ca2+, Zn2+ and Fe2+ could significantly affect PPi measurements. Fixed tissue was washed with PBT (PBS pH 7.5, 0.1% Triton X100, 1% BSA, 0.01% sodium azide) and analyzed by immunostaining and epifluorescent microscopy. Temperature-sensitive (TS) paralysis phenotype was assayed essentially as described previously [16]. For TS-paralysis assays, individual flies were collected on the day of eclosure and aged individually for 5 days. 