The relative increase in firing for the steady-state period was always larger than for the peak rate. Two known processes that contribute to declining firing rates in the LGMD during sustained stimulation are feed-forward inhibition14,15 and spike-frequency adaptation16. A large influx of calcium was observed along the main process between the SIZ and the excitatory dendritic field (Fig. We modified it to take into account the morphology of the LGMD and the Ca2+ imaging data in Figure 5. 6a–e).After confirming our ability to approximate the current injection results, we turned our attention to the contribution the simulated KCa conductance could make to visual processing. As it takes about a hundred milliseconds to activate fully, the observed adaptation could potentially satisfy the aforementioned timescale constraints. Our results suggest that spike-frequency adaptation (SFA) in the LGMD is mostly mediated by an SK-like calcium dependent potassium (KCa) conductance. The lack of an effect of apamin and other drugs targeting SK channels (Fig. However, the ineffectiveness of apamin in insects is well documented27, and the lack of effect of other SK drugs occurs under some circumstances in vertebrates as well37. 5), suggesting that the localization of the KCa conductance is optimized for maximal impact of its inhibitory effect35. Indeed, the onset transients were largely abolished in our model without feed-forward inhibition (Supplementary Fig. Indeed, the onset transients were largely abolished in our model without feed-forward inhibition (Supplementary Fig. In weakly electric fish, SK channels contribute to the frequency tuning of pyramidal neurons in the electrosensory lateral line lobe45. Studies in model systems such as the LGMD, for which relatively detailed knowledge of a behavioral role exists, reveal that the functions of individual conductances are often highly specific in their contribution to the overall neural computations carried out by their respective neurons. Instantaneous firing frequency curves were calculated as described previously16. The AHP time constant was fitted as described previously16. Cadmium saline (as before, but with 1 mM Cd2+, 0 mM Ca2+, 10 mM Mg2+) was added using a gravity perfusion system, as was high-K+ saline (95 mM, versus 5 mM in control). To increase [K+] without changing [Cl−], [Na+] was reduced to 54 mM, which did not abolish spiking. To increase [K+] without changing [Cl−], [Na+] was reduced to 54 mM, which did not abolish spiking. Model output was analyzed like experimental data, with N = 25 runs for all visual simulations. 1c), independent of velocity, size, aspect ratio and direction of motion (Fig. 2f), but produced an increase in fss (Fig. In contrast to BAPTA, Cd2+ produced a decrease in f0 and broadened the action potentials (compare insets in Fig. We depolarized the neuron from a slightly hyperpolarized holding potential before and after perfusion with high-potassium saline. Behaviorally, it has been demonstrated that the timing of the phases of the locust jump also occur after the crossing of fixed angular threshold sizes10. Additionally, several SK antagonists and agonists failed to produce an effect (Supplementary Pharmacology and Supplementary Fig. Like Cd2+, ChTX reduced f0 (Fig. 2), suggesting the presence of a BK conductance, which is known to act on the submillisecond timescale and shape the action potential and f0 (ref. 