To ~2 μg of poly(A)+ RNA or ~25 μg of total RNA in PCR tubes add H2O to a final volume of 54 μl, and then add 6 μl of 100 mM ZnCl2.Incubate the fragmentation reactions at 94°C in a thermal cycler for 55 sec for poly(A)+ RNA or 5 min for total RNA.Quench fragmentation reaction by placing on ice, and quickly adding 60 μl of 40 mM EDTA.Precipitate the fragmentation reaction as described in Support Protocol 1. Excised cDNAs should contain at least 25 nt added to the primer. Excised cDNAs should contain at least 25 nt added to the primer. Excised cDNAs should contain at least 25 nt added to the primer. Shorter products contain non-specific stops. Per library:15 μl HF buffer1.5 μl 10 mM dNTPs3.78 μl 10 μM forward PCR primer3.78 μl 10 μM barcoded reverse PCR primers52.6 μl H2O0.75 μl Phusion. The first line begins with @, and contains the name of the read. Reads that cannot be assigned to an index used should be stored in a file for unmapped barcodes. This file should be renamed with an informative, unique file name.Use SAMtools to read the accepted_hits.bam file for each library, and use a custom script to assign the mapped read 5′ ends, which correspond to the cDNA 3′ ends, to their corresponding genomic positions. The genome can then be split into transcribed units.Determine the total number of mappable reads in the library, the total number of reads mapping to rRNA, and the total number of reads mapping to coding sequences using a custom script. Early mapping of Ψ residues used a painstaking combination of procedures including RNase digestion, column chromatography, paper electrophoresis, and paper chromatography. Subsequent studies used a similar set of techniques to map Ψ positions in rRNA (Choi and Busch, 1978; Gupta and Randerath, 1979; Tanaka et al , 1980).A breakthrough in the ability to map Ψ residues with single nucleotide resolution was introduced by Bakin and Ofengad in 1993 (Bakin and Ofengand, 1993). Ligation of a 3′ adapter provides a uniform primer binding site for reverse transcription, replacing gene specific primers. Second is the addition of a selection for truncated cDNAs, which should be enriched in CMC dependent stops at Ψ residues.The ability of next-generation sequencing to provide transcriptome wide data provides Pseudo-seq with several advantages over the classic primer extension assay used for Ψ mapping. However, Pseudo-seq can be used to identify Ψs in all transcripts, Second, next-generation sequencing provides sufficient coverage for Ψ identification in transcripts of a range of abundances. Pseudouridine, the C5-glycoside isomer of uridine, is the most abundant post-transcriptional modification found within cellular RNAs owing to its presence at multiple positions in both rRNAs and tRNAs (Ge and Yu, 2013) (Fig. The extent of biological replication is also critical, as the use of replicate data allows for false positives to be efficiently filtered from transcripts of lower abundance. It should be noted that strains deleted for pseudouridylation factors can be used as biological replicates alongside wild-type replicates.The parameters used for Ψ calling during data analysis are also important. Use fresh CMC, or increase the CMC concentration used. Recent work has revealed dynamic regulation of pseudouridylation in response to cellular stressors, suggesting regulatory potential for pseudouridylation(Wu et al , 2011; Carlile et al , 2014; Courtes et al , 2014; Lovejoy et al , 2014; Schwartz et al , 2014) Although the molecular and cellular functions of endogenous mRNA pseudouridylation are not yet known, artificially targeted pseudouridylation of stop codons promotes non-canonical base-pairing of Ψ in the ribosomal decoding center leading to efficient nonsense suppression (Karijolich and Yu, 2011; Fernández et al , 2013). Transfer the supernatant to the original 15-ml conical tube, incubate in a 65°C water bath for 5 min, and place on ice for 2 min.Return the RNA to the beads, vortex briefly, and incubate on a rotating rack for 15 min at room temperature.Wash the beads three times with TES + NaCl buffer as in step 26.Wash the beads once with ice-cold water as in step 27.Elute poly(A)+ RNA twice with 1.8 ml 55°C H2O as in steps 28 to 29, pooling the eluates.Pass the eluates through a cellulose acetate filter with a syringe, and distribute the filtrate across four 2-ml microcentrifuge tubes. This protocol describes precipitation of nucleic acids from samples of small volumes. Fragments of the desired size range are gel purified, and subjected to 3′ adapter ligation, providing a uniform primer binding site for RT. 