Excellent reviews of the studies establishing this neurotrophic hypothesis have been published. BDNF signaling through the TrkB neurotrophin receptor has been established as a major regulator of adult fear circuitry function as well as expression of fear behavior. However, structural and functional development of the human brain is a nonlinear process,[23, 29, 66] giving rise to a developmental mismatch model, suggesting that during adolescence subcortical regions are further ahead in their maturation trajectories compared to prefrontal ones. [67] Consistent with this model, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans of human cortical gray matter for subjects between the ages of 4 and 21 years show that high-order association cortices mature later in development compared to sensorimotor regions, whose function they integrate. [68] In the prefrontal cortex, maximum synaptic density peaks at around 4 years of age,[69] followed by a substantial reduction in gray matter between adolescence and adulthood thought to be due to increased myelination in peripheral regions of the cortex that regulate cognitive processes. [70] There is an about 17% decrease in gray matter volume in the human prefrontal cortex between the ages of 10 and 26. [70] There is an about 17% decrease in gray matter volume in the human prefrontal cortex between the ages of 10 and 26. [71] This earlier maturation of limbic regions compared to prefrontal regions in humans provides a basis for nonlinear changes in behavioral phenotypes across development. [77] Thus, during early adolescence, WT mice undergo a disjunction in fear expression in which they are particularly sensitive to cued fear associations and insensitive to contextual fear associations. In addition, although BDNF has been established as a key factor in the developing brain for regulating the critical period related to visual system plasticity,[5, 6] its role in the developing fear circuitry has only recently been examined. Our previous studies implicate BDNF in modulating contextual fear learning during adolescence,[44] however, it is still unclear what the developmental impact of the BDNF Val66Met SNP is on cue fear extinction. In all, these analyses of the BDNF neurotrophin system across postnatal development demonstrate the complexity of the interactions between molecular function, development, and behavioral subdomains and that a polymorphism may confer both risk and resilience for anxiety, depending on the timing and nature of fear exposures. [15] The prodomain is secreted from cultured neurons and alters neuronal processes involved in learning and memory. [45] The truncated TrkB protein, on the other hand, increases between P2 and P50 and may be the predominant form in adult rat hippocampus, hypothalamus, and forebrain[45–47] (Fig. 