We have previously shown that all our CR cells possess higher ROS as well as superoxide dismutase (SOD) expression and activities (Wangpaichitr et al , 2009). We reviewed a large publicly available database of lung cancer patients for survival data of those with high expression of IDO since it is a suggested predictor for poor prognosis (Liu et al , 2016; Schalper et al , 2017; Theate et al , 2015) and is often found in late stage lung cancer. We firmly believe that regulation of ROS and the kynurenine pathway could be influenced by interactions with viral pathogens and should be considered during development of novel antiviral drugs and therapies. We firmly believe that regulation of ROS and the kynurenine pathway could be influenced by interactions with viral pathogens and should be considered during development of novel antiviral drugs and therapies. Thus, there are a large number of patients who require other therapy and may be more at risk for SARS-CoV-2 infection and subsequent severe disease. These novel findings can lead to new care plans for these patients by targeting tumor metabolism. Importantly, we believe that various tumor metabolic characteristics may be applied to screen for patients susceptible to SARS-CoV-2 infection. Covid-19/ SARS-CoV-2 airway mediated infection has increased lethality in immunocompromised patients, and many US hospitals are being flooded positive inpatients at this time. Currently, the impact of tumor metabolism on the tumor microenvironment is not well established and any correlation of SARS-COV-2 infection is unknown. Some studies have reported a differential decline in CD4 and CD8, and increased programmed cell death protein 1 [PD1], cytotoxic T-lymphocyte-associated protein 4 [CTLA4], and decreased intracellular gamma-interferon) and inflammatory cytokines (Qin et al , 2020). Interestingly, many reports have recently shown that that FoxP3 mRNA as well as protein can be detected in various cancer types including lung cancer (G. Y. Chen et al , 2008; Karanikas et al , 2008). 