Furthermore, this MALT1 proteolytic activity has a surprising biologic effect unrelated to NF-κB signaling; specifically, MALT1-dependent CYLD cleavage acutely alters endothelial structural integrity, thereby impacting vascular permeability (Figure 6). There are multiple settings in which this could have therapeutic benefit. There are multiple settings in which this could have therapeutic benefit. Tube formation and Electric Cell-substrate Impedance Sensing (ECIS)Tube formation assays were performed on growth factor-reduced (GFR) Matrigel™ Matrix (BD Biosciences) and visualized using either phase contrast microscopy or fluorescence microscopy after staining with ActinRed™ 555 ReadyProbes® reagent (Life Technologies). Assessment of pulmonary vascular leakageMice were perfused with Evans blue dye, administered through the external jugular vein, and treated ± TRAP-6. Extravascular Evans blue dye was quantified from perfused, excised lungs using formamide extraction and spectrophotometric quantification at 620 and 740 nm. Statistical analysisWhen experiments involved only two conditions, differences in means were evaluated for statistical significance using one- or two-tailed, unpaired Student’s t-test, as appropriate. In the latter case, significant differences between treatments were assessed using Tukey’s test, while Dunnet’s test was used to compare each individual treatment to controls. Sidak’s correction was used to account for multiple testing. Taken together, the findings described here suggest that pharmaceutical targeting of MALT1 protease activity may have broader implications than previously expected. We had already shown that thrombin stimulation of protease activated receptor-1 (PAR1), the principal thrombin receptor on endothelial cells, induces NF-κB activation through the CBM pathway in a manner very much analogous to the mechanism by which antigen receptors induce NF-κB in lymphocytes (Delekta et al , 2010). Regardless of the precise mechanism, it appears that the N- and C-terminal domains function optimally only when together, with the N-terminal CAP-Gly domains mediating the recruitment of CYLD to microtubules, and the C-terminal domain mediating necessary enzymatic or other activities to fully stabilize microtubules.Interestingly, the MALT1-specific cleavage site, as determined through studies of activated T lymphocytes, is located just C-terminal to the CAP-Gly domains, following position R324 (Staal et al , 2011) (Figure 2A). To this end, we generated SVEC cells that stably express either wild-type CYLD or a non-cleavable mutant of CYLD, which contains a single amino acid substitution converting the critical P1 arginine at the cleavage site to alanine (R324A) (Staal et al , 2011) (Figure S5A). Cells were imaged over a 2-minute period immediately before the addition of thrombin, and then again either immediately after addition (Figures 3C-3E), or following a 5-minute delay (Figure S5B and S5C). Thus, this CYLD mutant, resistant to MALT1-dependent cleavage (Staal et al , 2011), acts in a dominant negative fashion, suggesting that CYLD cleavage is required for efficient PAR1-induced endothelial permeability and tube disruption.The results support the overall hypothesis that cleavage-dependent separation of the CYLD N-terminal microtubule-binding and C-terminal microtubule-stabilization domains renders the protein unable to perform its functions with regard to maintaining microtubules. 