The spectrum of 14 can be explained as being derived from both the cyclic and acyclic forms of this aldehyde (Fig. The presence of the cyclic form can explain the ready loss of water, as well as the base peak of m/z 70 which has the structure of protonated dihydropyrrole. Its most common use is as a trypsin substrate to measure enzymatic activity of trypsin preparations [51]. Salsolinol (23), a condensation product of dopamine and acetaldehyde, can be considered a prototype molecule of this class. Importantly, salsolinol can be synthesized endogenously in dopaminergic neurons of mammals including humans [57]. However, recent studies showed that salsolinol does not cross the blood brain barrier [59]. Traces of formaldehyde might have been present in the extraction solvent, which may have led to a nonenzymatic condensation with dopamine [57]. When it comes to phytochemical investigations, the past several decades of research have focused almost exclusively on two abundant classes of compounds: triterpene glycosides and phenolic acids. Laurolitsine (32), for example, displayed IC50 values of 2.6 and 6.8 µM against dopamine D1 and D2 receptors, respectively. Biological activities of protopine and allocryptopine have been extensively studied (for a review see [85]). 2.6.1 Tryptophan-Derived Pictet-Spengler AdductsCompounds 40 and 41 are Pictet-Spengler adducts formed by condensation of tryptophan with formaldehyde and acetaldehyde, respectively. β-Carboline is a common structural motif for monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibition; however, 40 and 41 do not inhibit MAO [97]. In the radioligand displacement assay, the methanolic extract was found to inhibit binding of receptor probes 8-OHDPAT (5-HT1A) and LSD (5-HT7) with IC50 values of 2.5 and 2.2 µg/mL, respectively. In plants, it has been reported in Ranunculus sceleratus (Ranunculaceae) [101] and, interestingly, in several Citrus species [102]. The affinity for 5-HT7 was particularly strong, with an IC50 of 23 pM, which makes Nω-methylserotonin one of the most potent known ligands to any receptor, not just to 5-HT7. For comparison, the natural ligand serotonin showed an IC50 value of 0.86 nM for the same receptor. The presence of 44 was confirmed by comparison of retention times and fragmentation pattern with the authentic standard (Fig. In contrast to the β-carbolines, azepine structures cannot produce retro Diels-Alder fragments and fragment instead by opening of the azepine ring followed by elimination of methylene imine to produce the base peak (m/z 188 in 44 and 174 in 43).Further confirmation of the structure of 44 was derived from NMR analysis. Which cyclization pathway will predominate depends both on the experimental conditions and on the type of aldehyde. The ready loss of a methyl radical (m/z 186), along with the fragment ion of m/z 170 corresponding to the loss of methylamine (MH-CH3NH2)+, indicated that the N(2) nitrogen on the β-carboline ring was methylated. Accordingly, the most likely position of the double bond is 1,2 which was confirmed by comparison of retention time and fragmentation pattern with authentic N(2)-methyl-6-hydroxy-3,4-dihydro-β-carboline. It should be noted that dihydro-β-carbolines are often by-products of Pictet-Spengler condensation [107]. 2.12, the fragmentation pattern of α-N-feruloyl/isoferuloyl arginine (47, 48) is dominated by fragment ions of m/z 177, 149, 145, 117, and 89 originating from the ferulic/isoferulic acid portion of the amide. The first is that amides of isoferulic acid tend to produce less of the secondary fragment ions (m/z 149, 145 and 117) originating from elimination of small neutrals (H2O, MeOH, and CO) from the primary acylium ion (m/z 177) (compare Fig. Our investigations on both quadrupole/time-of-flight and ion trap instruments revealed that this fragment ion originates from an ion-molecule reaction in the collision cell and is formed by addition of water to the ion of m/z 145. After subtracting ferulic acid (C10H10O4) and adding a water molecule to account for the fact that water is lost during formation of the amide, the formula of the amine is predicted as C6H14N4O2. However, due to changing taxonomic classification and varying degrees of documentation for some of those reports, it was not always clear whether the tested species was indeed A. racemosa. In all cases, the geometry of the double bond was shown to be trans as characterized by the large coupling constant (3JH,H = ~15.7 Hz, average) between the olefinic protons. Although mass spectrometry cannot distinguish between the cis and trans configurations of the double bonds in these compounds, based on co-elution with the synthetic standards the configuration was determined to be trans in all cases. No identification of a specific compound was mentioned in that early report. This observation can be explained by a lack of readily available acidic hydrogen that needs to be transferred to the amine during fragmentation. Similar cholinergic activities have not been investigated for ferulic and isoferulic acid choline esters. l-carnitine is widely distributed throughout the plant and animal kingdoms. As all clinical trials to date were carried out without consideration and/or knowledge of the existence of these alkaloids, there is no way of knowing how much (if any) of these compounds were present in the tested extracts. For example, at 100 µM of the test compound, even 99 % purity would result in a 1 µM concentration of impurity. This process led to the identification of Nω-methylserotonin (10) as the active serotonergic principle [38]. Another benefit of the basic nitrogen is that molecular species observed upon electrospray ionization are typically protonated molecules. In other words, the assignment can be made with various degrees of confidence. The most commonly used nomenclature is that proposed by Sumner et al  [45], which assigns three levels of confidence. Comparison of tandem mass spectra of close chemical analogs is a viable approach commonly used in drug metabolism or chemical degradation studies. The basic idea behind this approach is the long-established “shift technique” pioneered by Klaus Biemann [46, 47]. Perhaps fittingly, the original approach was developed to determine the structure of alkaloids. Even if the measured spectrum of the unknown matches a published spectrum, without comparison of retention times under identical conditions, there is always a possibility that the two compounds may just be close structural analogs. A molecular formula with three or more nitrogens is a strong indicator for the presence of a guanidino group, as there are few other possibilities that can account for so many nitrogens in the molecule, particularly if the molecular mass is modest (<400 Da). During collision-induced dissociation, acyclic guanidines display a characteristic loss of neutral guanidine (−59 Da; CH5N3). 