Another well-characterized p53 target, MDM2, functions as an oncogene when overexpressed, consistent with its role as a negative regulator of p53 (7). However, no activity was detected in in vitro kinase assays using histone H1 and GST-Rb (C-terminus) as substrates (data not shown). However, we did detect abnormal nuclei in some cyclin G1 overexpressing cells similar to those described for cyclin G2 overexpressing cells (data not shown and (25)). 2A, right panel).We also examined endogenous cyclin G1 protein in the A1−5 rat fibroblast cell line. Furthermore, cyclin G1 stability does not correlate with proliferative state, since there is no difference in the half-life of cyclin G1 in proliferating transfected U2OS cells compared to that in p53-arrested NIH-3T3 or A1−5 cells. Treatment of A1−5 cells at 32°C with MG-132 resulted in a substantial increase in the stability of cyclin G1 in comparison to the DMSO treated control (from ∼20 minutes to ∼2 hours; Fig. 2C).In order to test whether proteasome inhibitors could increase the levels of endogenous cyclin G1 in undamaged cells, we treated a variety of cell lines with MG-132 and observed a consequent increase in cyclin G1 protein (Fig. In a similar experiment, HA antibodies were used to IP the tagged ubiquitin and blots were probed for Flag-cyclin G1 (Fig. ARF physically interacts with MDM2 and antagonizes its ability to negatively regulate p53. Cyclin G1 has been categorized as a cyclin because it contains a region of protein sequence homology, the cyclin box, common to all members of the cyclin family of cell cycle regulators (15). Expression of the ΔRing mutant resulted in a reduced level of both poly- and monoubiquitinated cyclin G1 in both cell lines when compared to wild-type MDM2. Cyclins are dependent on the cyclin box to associate with specific kinase partners CDKs and regulate their kinase activity during the cell cycle (16). As shown in Figure 6D; control, cyclin G1 and KD infected cells demonstrated similar cell cycle profiles following synchronization with thymidine prior to irradiation. However, we did detect a defect in the G2/M checkpoint following γ-irradiation in KD expressing cells. Dephosphorylation of MDM2 at T216 results in increased complex formation between MDM2 and p53 and subsequent degradation of p53. p19ARF was a gift from Karl Munger and p14ARF was kindly provided by Martine Roussel. For half-life experiments in transfected U2OS cells, a single transfected 10-cm dish was trypsinized and plated in 5 wells of a 6-well dish. Quantitation of bands was performed using ImageJ. Quantitation of bands was performed using ImageJ. Coverslips were blocked with 5% normal goat serum in PBS and incubated with primary antibody for 1 hour at RT. Additionally, we noted a substantial increase in the steady-state level of the KD mutant, suggesting an increase in protein stability. The instability of cyclin G1 was not predicted by its sequence as it encodes neither a PEST sequence nor a destruction box motif found in mitotic cyclins (36).The half-lives of the wild-type and mutant cyclin G1 proteins were determined by treating transfected U2OS cells with cycloheximide (Fig. 