Control over their hydrolysis rate is predictable and tunable using rational structural modifications. Using these 3 linkers, 6 different MMs were synthesized: DOX-S-MM; DOX-M-MM60; DOX-F-MM; chex-S-MM; chex-M-MM; and chex-F-MM where S, M, and F correspond to the linker structure: slow, medium and fast, respectively (Scheme 2A, see SI for synthetic details). Validating our prodrug linker design, the toxicity toward both cell lines followed the same trend: DOX-F > DOX-M > DOX-S. Inversion of image intensity was performed for subsequent analysis in order to aid visualization. Theranostic agents — systems that simultaneously provide therapeutic and diagnostic modalities — are promising tools for personalized medicine.1–4 These agents can, in principle, afford molecular insights into disease states and non-invasively report in real-time on the accumulation, release, and efficacy of therapeutic agents, thereby enabling real-time therapeutic selection.3,5,6 Since their multifunctional requirements are difficult to achieve with small molecules, theranostic systems are often based on nanoscale materials, which themselves possess useful properties such as controllable size and shape, high loading/multiplexing capability, tunable circulation half-life, predictable biodistribution, and targeted tissue accumulation.7–9 Indeed, a plethora of theranostic agents based on nanoscale material scaffolds (e.g., liposomes, micelles, dendrimers, polymers, etc.) 2 mm slices were imaged through the samples with the field of view of 5 × 5 cm; and, the data matrices were 256 × 256 points. For cells that were imaged by MRI, the media was removed. Cell lines were authenticated by short tandem repeat DNA profiling and were confirmed to be mycoplasma negative, using the MycoAlert Mycoplasma Testing Kit (Lonza). Cells were then either exposed to UV for 30 min (+UV) or not (-UV). Tumor growth was monitored for 2–4 weeks until appropriate cumulative diameters (~ 1 cm, measured by a digital caliper) were achieved. Tumor region was localized in focal spot of surface coil, with animal restrained in order to allow unhindered breathing while minimizing motion around the hind leg and tumor. Images were analyzed using either ImageJ or custom routines written in Matlab (Mathworks, Natick, MA). Excess DOX-PC was then removed by media washing, and the cells were exposed to 365 nm light for 30 min. Prodrug activation kinetics can significantly impact therapeutic outcomes: activation that occurs too quickly or too slowly can be detrimental.62 Most prodrugs do not provide facile spectroscopic readouts upon activation; thus, liquid chromatography with tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS-MS) or inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS) are traditionally used to quantify prodrug versus free drug in tissue samples of interest. Cells were incubated with PC2 (17 mg PC2/mL; 107 µM of conjugated DOX) following the same procedure as described above. 