In fact, in these control conditions, there was a slight decrease in green fluorescence due to photobleaching, suggesting that the netrin-1-induced increase in green fluorescence is underestimated. These data indicate that the β-actin 3’UTR drives the translation of new protein in response to netrin-1. First, the degree of phosphorylation on the ‘near’ and ‘far’ sides was taken as the ratio of phospho-4EBP to total-4EBP intensity per unit area (Fig. Phosphorylation asymmetry was calculated as the near/far ratio of 4EBP phosphorylation. Second, phosphorylation asymmetry was calculated as the difference between the ‘centers of mass’ of phospho- and total-4EBP intensity (Experimental Procedures and Fig. Second, phosphorylation asymmetry was calculated as the difference between the ‘centers of mass’ of phospho- and total-4EBP intensity (Experimental Procedures and Fig. The increase occurs just 5 minutes after addition of netrin-1 and is abolished by inhibitors of translation. This relatively small knockdown of β-actin probably reflects the large maternal pool of actin that is recycled for the first 24-36 hours of embryonic development and likely predominates in the pioneering population of retinal axons, which develop just 28 hours post-fertilization. It could be argued that attractive turning is more sensitive to β-actin levels (and hence actin polymerization rates) than axon extension or repulsive turning, and the β-actin AMO knocks down baseline β-actin translation levels just enough to block attractive turning but not extension or repulsion. As β-actin synthesis occurs at least 10 minutes before overt turning, we hypothesize that asymmetrical β-actin translation prefigures the turn itself. Further studies will be needed to test this idea, especially the identity of proteins synthesized in attractive versus repulsive conditions. Consistent with this, we have shown that Vg1RBP also interacts with cofilin mRNA, which is translated in response to the chemorepellent Slit-28. The exact sequence of signalling between DCC and Src remains largely unknown, but Src might in turn be activated by DCC through direct binding or via focal adhesion kinase (FAK), which interacts with DCC43. Consistent with this, the repellent Slit2 does not induce β-actin synthesis, and indeed causes a significant decrease in β-actin levels8, possibly caused by depolymerization due to Slit2-induced cofilin synthesis, combined with suppression of β-actin translation. Cycloheximide (25 μM, Sigma) and rapamycin (10 nM, Calbiochem) were bath-applied to retinal cultures immediately prior to the addition of netrin-1. The Zenon Rabbit IgG Labeling Kit (Molecular Probes) was used for 4EBP double staining (5:1 Zenon reagent:primary antibody ratio for phospho-4EBP, 3:1 for total-4EBP). Morpholinos and plasmidsAntisense morpholinos (AMOs) conjugated to lissamine were designed and supplied by GeneTools: Xenopus β-actin AMO: 5’-CAATATCGTCTTCCATTGTGATCTG-3’; control: 5’-CCTCTTACCTCAGTTACAATTTATA-3’. In situ hybridizationProbes were generated of a 446 bp fragment (1172-1618bp, Accession No. For fluorescence in situ hybridization, retinal cultures from stage 33/34 embryos were fixed in 4% PFA, 7.5% sucrose in PBS for 1 hour at RT. The center of mass was analyzed using ImageJ software (NIH). Live cell imagingFluorescence recoveryStage 24 Kaede-β-actin 3’UTR injected retinal primordia were cultured for 24 hours and imaged for 30 minutes. Openlab and Volocity software (Improvision) was used to calculate the number and speed of granules. On Western blots, the Vg1RBP antibody detected a predominant band of the expected size (65 kDa) in both head and eye lysates, verifying the specificity of the antibody (Fig. 2e) using immunostaining or Western blot analysis and exhibit similar granular localization patterns and levels of expression (Fig. Granule movement patterns ranged from oscillations with no net movement, to uni- and bi-directional movements over small and longer (> 10μm) distances. BDNF has been shown to increase protein synthesis in neurons27 and elicits protein synthesis-dependent turning responses in Xenopus spinal neurons7. 