Classical steroid hormone receptors include the androgen receptor, estrogen receptor alpha, estrogen receptor beta, and the progesterone receptor. This synaptic patterning correlates strongly with masculine patterns of sexual motivation and sexual performance in adulthood (Amateau and McCarthy, 2004, 2002; Lenz et al , 2013; Wright and McCarthy, 2009).We have also recently found that microglia phagocytose more cells in the neonatal female hippocampus than in the neonatal male hippocampus, but not before the prenatal testosterone surge (Nelson et al , 2017). This sex difference, too, is hormone-driven— estradiol treatment of females reduces phagocytic microglia to male-typical numbers (Nelson et al ,2017). However, we have not yet determined if the sex difference in phagocytosis of progenitor cells included apoptotic or healthy cells. In the rat POA, male astrocytes are more morphologically complex than female astrocytes; estradiol drives this effect (Amateau and McCarthy, 2002). In the rat POA, male astrocytes are more morphologically complex than female astrocytes; estradiol drives this effect (Amateau and McCarthy, 2002). Environmental factors such as prenatal stress, early life adversity, prenatal inflammation/immune activation, altered prenatal steroid environment, famine, and maternal obesity all increase the risk for developing a mental health disorder (Andersen, 2015; Baron-Cohen et al , 2015; Brown, 2011; Brown et al , 2014; Canetta et al , 2014; Godfrey et al , 2017; Kosidou et al , 2015; Zeanah et al , 2009). Environmental factors such as prenatal stress, early life adversity, prenatal inflammation/immune activation, altered prenatal steroid environment, famine, and maternal obesity all increase the risk for developing a mental health disorder (Andersen, 2015; Baron-Cohen et al , 2015; Brown, 2011; Brown et al , 2014; Canetta et al , 2014; Godfrey et al , 2017; Kosidou et al , 2015; Zeanah et al , 2009). Furthermore, there are sex differences in many mental health disorders that have a neurodevelopmental origin. Furthermore, there are sex differences in many mental health disorders that have a neurodevelopmental origin. All these studies analyzed adults because many symptoms of these disorders are diagnosed later in life (with the exception of ASD and Tourette Disorder, which show symptoms early in life). Thus, stress may impact microglia through mediating effects on the stress system and release of stress hormones, such as glucocorticoids.Childhood adversities are estimated to cause ~40% of all childhood onset mental health disorders and ~25% of adult onset disorders (Green et al , 2010). In the case of both male- and female-typical behaviors, adult concentrations of circulating hormones are the second necessary component for the full complement of sex-typical physiological or behavioral phenotypes to manifest. Thus, adolescents and young adults may be especially vulnerable to exogenous perturbations that are associated with risk for neuropsychiatric or neurological disorders (Lenroot and Giedd, 2010; Walker et al , 2017).What little work has been devoted to microglia during this period suggests that sex differences are apparent. These data suggest that sex-specific responses to systemic inflammation during the juvenile period may predict adolescent behavioral outcomes. In a follow-up study, Bollinger et al , (2017) investigated additional brain regions, including the amygdala, orbitofrontal cortex, and hippocampus, and found evidence of mild basal sex differences in neuroimmune parameters, including higher baseline expression of CD40, CD200, and arginine genes in the amygdala in females than in males. In females, the lack of TDF allows differentiation of the bipotential gonad into ovaries along a default program in the absence of any intervening signals.Male-typical sexual differentiation depends upon secretion of androgens during the perinatal window in males. In contrast, only microglial-depletion females showed a blunting of the acute stress response in adulthood (Nelson and Lenz, 2016), whereas only males showed evidence of impaired sexual behavior (VanRyzin et al , 2016), similar to inhibiting microglia with minocycline during the early neonatal period (Lenz et al , 2013). Together, these data show that sex differences in how microglia shape brain development and long-term function may have previously unappreciated implications for sex differences in behavior throughout life.Anixety and mood disorders:Anxiety and mood disorders are more common in females than in males, and inflammatory processes have been linked to mood dysregulation and anxiety and depression. Together, these data show that sex differences in how microglia shape brain development and long-term function may have previously unappreciated implications for sex differences in behavior throughout life.Anixety and mood disorders:Anxiety and mood disorders are more common in females than in males, and inflammatory processes have been linked to mood dysregulation and anxiety and depression. Surprisingly, serum inflammatory markers did not correlate with TSPO density in the brain; these data suggest that peripheral and central immune activation are somewhat independent (citation here? Moreover, in rodents but not primates, the dominant effects of sexual differentiation are accomplished by the actions of the hormone estradiol (Bakker & Baum, 2008), which is locally metabolized in the brain from testosterone by the enzyme p450 aromatase (Naftolin et al , 1971; Roselli & Resko, 1993).Early life androgen exposure promotes a process called masculinization, wherein a male typical phenotype is programmed. Stress-induced catecholamine activity at the β-adrenoceptor also (at least partly) mediates microglial proinflammatory changes and adoption of an anxiety-like phenotype following RSDS (Wohleb et al , 2011).A downside of the RSDS model is that it does not allow for studies of biological sex, as adult male mice typically cannot be induced to attack females, and females do not show intra-sex aggression. Behavioral outcomes of this masculinization process include a strong motivation to mount sexually receptive females, intromit, and ejaculate, and additionally to engage in male-male aggressive behaviors (Fig. This study shows that sex-specific hormone receptor interactions can both promote resilience to mood-related dysfunction as well as contribute to stress-induced mood dysregulation. This same group has shown that the inflammatory gene expression in the brain in response to immune challenge with LPS during pregnancy is also blunted, suggesting central immunosuppression (Sherer et al , 2017).Relevance to postpartum depression:As discussed above in the section on major depression, there are clear links between stress, depression and anxiety and neuroimmune dysregulation. As with major depression, stress during pregnancy is a major risk factor for postpartum depression (PPD) (Beck, 2001). Future studies in which TSPO imaging of brain inflammatory changes in new mothers with PPD or measuring CSF cytokine levels in samples obtained from mothers undergoing epidural anesthesia may be more informative.Hormonal imbalances following childbirth, including rapid declinations in estrogen and progesterone levels, blunted oxytocin levels, and elevated corticotropin releasing factor levels have also been associated with risk for postpartum depressive symptoms (reviewed in (Schiller et al , 2015)). There are other examples in which permanent sexual differentiation appears reversible via relatively limited genetic manipulations (e.g., Kimchi et al , 2007), thus there may be many active signals that repress a feminine phenotype and/or masculine phenotype outside the critical period for sexual differentiation.Despite the dominance of the “organizational” hormonal theory of sexual differentiation, there is increasing evidence that some sex differences established during ontogeny are also programmed by other contributing factors, including sex chromosome effects and maternal-fetal interactions. 