In the past, Theiler and others had carried out drenching experiments, in which animals were force-fed plants suspected of being toxic. Toxicologists managed to isolate the toxic principle of various poisonous plants whilst physiologists looked at the anatomical effects of toxicosis. The bacteriologist, David Bruce, had proved a link between nagana, game and tsetse flies in the 1890s (discussed below), but a decline in incidence after the rinderpest epizootic (1896–7), which killed many cattle and faunal carriers, stalled further investigations for over twenty years. In the case of nagana, however, incidence was due to environmental factors rather than direct contagion, and for the next three decades, the immediate catalyst for particular research initiatives was always the plight of white farmers. But this was not always the case and Africans were not necessarily excluded from access to biomedical advances. Disease control facilitated overstocking and thus overgrazing, thereby giving rise to erosion and the propagation of more resilient, but often less nutritious and potentially more toxic, wild plants. Optimising livestock yields was predicated not just upon biomedicine but also upon a more ecologically conscious approach to veld management. Veterinary science alone could not achieve that end. Veterinary science alone could not achieve that end. Continued links with the metropole ensured the flow of European (as opposed to simply British) science to the southern hemisphere. Literate and enterprising farmers, in turn, used this knowledge to devise their own practical means of combating these pests. In the first decade of the twentieth century, Joseph Baynes from Nels Rust in Natal, worked with the bacteriologist, Herbert Watkins-Pitchford, and put Lounsbury’s analysis of the lifecycle of the brown tick to practical use by producing a three-day arsenical dip to cleanse his stock. Veterinarians later introduced this method to East Coast fever areas.50 The expansion of veterinary knowledge and the refinement of methods of disease control therefore involved a two-way interaction between scientists and farmers. Each animal species, whether wild or domestic, engaged in different grazing habits that were now analysed within the remit of the ecological language of vegetation succession and climax. Philip Viljoen, amongst others, invoked the language of a ‘balance of nature’ and suggested that it was essential to restore or create a ‘natural’ equilibrium through sophisticated grazing practices, based on a careful assessment of the carrying capacity of the land. Viljoen also emphasised the importance of indigenous, as opposed to exotic, grasses, along with the need to cultivate fodder.63 The indigenisation of grassland research reflected a dramatic shift from the acclimatisation experiments using alien flora that had characterised both veld and forest policies in the early twentieth century. Scientists attributed the growing danger of toxicosis to overstocking, which biomedical advances had helped to promote. Africans in particular made an important contribution to the identification of toxic plants as well as to the aetiology and control of nagana. Comparative success in tackling a number of dangerous stock diseases boosted institutional self-confidence and encouraged South African scientists to intervene in disease control campaigns beyond South Africa’s borders. Second only to gold mining, rural products generated the largest amount of export revenue, with wool constituting the prime pastoral commodity throughout the first half of the twentieth century. The governor, Alfred Milner, who oversaw the early years of reconstruction, was determined to make the Transvaal a prosperous colony by promoting gold mining on the Witwatersrand, as well increasing agricultural production, primarily by white, and preferably British, settler farmers. Improving the livestock economy in order to provide cheap food for the Rand as well as the cities was integral to this policy. Self-consciously progressive white commercial farmers were politically influential and, through organisations such as the Agricultural Union, they collectively put pressure on the state to finance research that would overcome environmental barriers to improved production.10 The Department of Agriculture sponsored a variety of research programmes that looked into such issues as the development of dryland farming, the cultivation of better varieties of seeds and grasses, as well as the elimination of injurious crop pests. Nonetheless, the Veterinary Department received the largest share of state grants, which reflected not only the economic importance attributed to the livestock industry but also the high cost involved in developing this branch of science. In defending the €90,000 spent on the Onderstepoort Veterinary Institute by the late 1920s du Toit was also reflecting upon the expanding nature of veterinary research, which was to continue throughout the first half of the twentieth century. These developments illustrated more than just growing scientific complexities. These developments illustrated more than just growing scientific complexities. Field experiments at Armoedsvlakte Farm, near Vryburg, dominated research in the 1910s and revealed that lamsiekte was a form of botulism, acquired by gnawing carrion scattered around the veld. 