LC-MS and molecular networking approaches revealed the high chemodiversity of MicrocystisTo profile the chemical output from MC- and non-MC-producing M. aeruginosa strains, two complementary approaches were used. Further chemical studies are needed to firmly establish their structures.We also gained new insight into the wide diversity of secondary metabolites produced by these freshwater cyanobacteria as the spectral networks identified a total of 546 compounds. The expansion of genomic mining techniques to predict structures and identify products of new pathways remains a challenge and opportunity for the future. Microcystis bioactive peptides may have complementary or interchangeable functionsDespite their different metabolic profiles, the three strains grew comparably under monoculture conditions, as reported for the WT and MT under several growth conditions (Dittmann et al , 1997; Hesse et al , 2001; Briand et al , 2012). To date, most effort at understanding the function of cyanopeptides has focused on MC. However, a final answer can only be found through bioassay-guided structure elucidation of the active compounds. However, a final answer can only be found through bioassay-guided structure elucidation of the active compounds. Taken together, these results suggest that cooperation processes may take place preferentially when the cells are physically in contact, but additional experiments need to be performed to explore this hypothesis.This work shows that even without cell contact, physiological responses to co-culturing are reflected in the stimulation of the production of the major produced peptides. However, the lack of field studies, showing the presence of active substances in the environment and their effect on target organisms, is evident and needs to be filled. Samples were evaporated to dryness under N2 and kept frozen until analysis.Dry intra- and extracellular extracts were dissolved with acetonitrile (ACN; EMD Chemicals, Gibbstown, NJ, USA) and internal standard (BOC-L-protected Ornithine, 0.25 mg ml−1 in ACN; Chem-Impex International, Wood Dale, IL, USA) was added before HPLC-MS/MS analysis. High-performance liquid chromatography electrospray ionization mass spectrometry (HPLC-ESI-MS/MS) analysisEach sample (20 μl) was injected twice into a reverse-phase HPLC system using a Phenomenex Kinetex C18 column (5 μm, 100 mm × 4.60 mm) with a gradient of 5–99% ACN in water with 0.1% formic acid over 12 min, held at 99% for 5 min, and then returned to 5% at 22 min for another 3 min. Further, the mass differences between and the relative intensity of isotopic peaks were analyzed to gain information on the presence of possible halogen atoms (e.g. The input data were simultaneously searched against annotated reference spectra in the GNPS spectral library. Four were already described cyanopeptolin metabolites (Cya A, B, C and Cya 963A with a quasi-molecular ion at m/z 946 [M-H2O]+), whereas the other six are new species with m/z 896, 915, 949, 963, 965 and 979 Da (Figs S3 and S4). The cyanopeptolins produced by the NT presented another partial sequence, Ahp–Phe–MePhe, as characterized by the following series of fragments m/z 134, 215, 243, 292 and 404 (Fig. S4).Additionally, several cyanobactins were produced by the three strains, all corresponding to previously identified compounds. 1A and B) and the NT produced two short linear cyanobactins: aeruginosamide B and C (compounds 16 and 17 in Fig. To evaluate the accuracy of the spectral count quantitation method, a correlation analysis was performed between the spectral counts and the internal standard methods. 