The Arp2/3 and cofilin pathways appear to be synergistic in vivoPrevious studies have shown that EGF-stimulated lamellipod protrusions are dependant on actin polymerization at the leading edge (Chan et al , 1998) and that both the Arp2/3 complex and cofilin appear to be significantly involved in the generation of free barbed ends for actin polymerization at the leading edge after EGF stimulation (Bailly et al , 2001; Zebda et al , 2001; Chan et al , 2000). However, the relative contributions of the Arp2/3 complex and cofilin have not been determined, nor has their role in generating free barbed ends been analyzed in live cells. First, to verify that the blocking antibodies were functional in these cells and that saturating amounts of antibody were injected, we conducted dose-response experiments (Fig. 2A-H,Q), they extended broad lamellipods rapidly within a few minutes (the area increase at 180 seconds is indicated in red in Fig. 2M-O) (Chan et al , 2000) extended broad lamellipods, nor did they show normal accumulation of GFP-βactin at the leading edge (Fig. The rate of GFP-βactin incorporation at the leading edge is proportional to free barbed end formation (Lorenz et al , 2004). Stimulated control cells exhibited broad circumferential lamellipods, containing a characteristic dense actin network (Fig. 4A, consisting of a dense actin network, several micrometers thick, at the cell edge, that extends circumferentially along the entire perimeter of the cell. However, these cells never displayed the large, broad lamellipods of the control cells (Fig. Blocking Arp2/3 activity, however, significantly but only partially reduced the number of free barbed ends generated after stimulation (Bailly et al , 2001). This model is supported by experiments in which local cofilin activation by uncaging was sufficient to initiate protrusion and define the location and direction of protrusion in vivo (Ghosh et al , 2004) and by experiments showing evidence that the actin-filament-severing activity of cofilin is crucial for protrusions such as growth cones and neurite extensions (Endo et al , 2003).In this model, the filaments newly polymerized from cofilin-generated barbed ends are ATP-rich filaments that promote the nucleation and branching activity of the Arp2/3 complex. This rate is directly proportional to the number of barbed ends formed, thus this assay allows a relative barbed end measurement in live cells. We have used this method here to examine the relative contributions of the Arp2/3 complex and cofilin to barbed end formation in vivo. We propose thereafter a model for stimulated protrusion that incorporates our new data on the interaction between Arp2/3 and cofilin, and we discuss its relationship to the classic dendritic model of protrusion (Pollard and Borisy, 2003). In each case, IgG fractions were isolated using T-Gel (Pierce). For the EM studies, 5 nm gold conjugated goat anti-biotin antibodies were purchased from Ted Pella. For the EM studies, 5 nm gold conjugated goat anti-biotin antibodies were purchased from Ted Pella. Images were taken every 10 seconds with constant exposure times. Images were captured below the saturation level of the camera. The mean fluorescence intensity of each cell was measured by linearly converting digitized image using NIH image (program developed by the National Institute of Health, available on the internet) and analyzing the images in the same program. Cells were grouped according to their mean fluorescent intensity into four groups of increasing intensity for further analysis. The cell area in each image is supplied by the macro. Images were recorded on a Zeiss Axiovert 100M equipped with a 63× Plan Apochromat 1.4 NA objective, a temperature control chamber, and driven by the OpenLab software (Improvision). Electron microscopyMTLn3 cells were grown on 5 mm glass coverslips, starved and microinjected with antibody and biotin-actin. Coverslips were mounted on a rapid freezing apparatus (CF100; Life Cell Corp.) and frozen by slamming them into a liquid-nitrogen-cooled copper block. 