Furthermore, to minimize any presynaptic effects of TEA, we included picrotoxin (PTX) and kynurenic acid (KYNA) to block GABAA and ionotropic glutamate receptors, respectively, in both control conditions and during TEA incubation.Incubation of cerebellar slices with actinomycin D (25 μM + PTX + KYNA) alone for 3 hrs did not alter the I-V relationship of EPSCs or the distance-dependent increase in rectification index (Fig. However following a 3 hr incubation with 1 mM TEA (+ actD + PTX + KYNA), we found that synapses located at 40–60 μm from the soma became more inwardly rectifying than controls (Fig. The decay time constant of EPSCs was more rapid after TEA treatment relative to actinomycin D (+PTX+KYNA) control at 40–60 μm, also consistent with a local GluA2 decrease, whereas no difference was observed at synapses in proximal dendrites (<40 μm, Fig. A stronger inward rectification and more rapid decay time of EPSCs suggest an increase in GluA2-lacking receptors at 40–60 μm following TEA treatment. 3D) and single channel conductance at 40–60 μm increased to 12.5 ± 1.0 pS (n = 5) from control 8.7 ± 0.7 pS (n = 11; P < 0.01). Following incubation of cerebellar slices with cycloheximide for 3 hrs we observed no gradient in the rectification index of EPSCs along dendrites. Synapses that showed stronger inward rectification at the beginning of recording also had a greater increase in rectification index (Fig. As a control for any non-specific effects, the inclusion of an oligomer that does not bind to CPEB3 in the pipette solution (10 μM) did not alter the rectification index of EPSCs over the time course of the recording (Fig. These results indicate that TTX treatment increased the synaptic expression of GluA2-containing receptors.In addition to inclusion of GluA2 subunits, the interaction of TARP with GluA2-lacking receptors can also produce a moderate increase in rectification index (Soto et al , 2007). Bath application of CNQX and cyclothiazide (to reduce AMPAR desensitization) elicited an additional inward current (44.2 ± 17.3 pA; n = 4), which was not enhanced after the TTX treatment (48.9 ± 11.0 pA; n = 5, Suppl. Thus, the increase in EPSC rectification index is unlikely to result from an increase in a TARP-AMPAR association.This result together with the two opposing effects on the dendritic GluA2 gradient by TEA and an N-type Ca2+ channel blocker (Fig. A second protein synthesis inhibitor, anisomycin (40 μM), also prevented the increase in rectification index (0.33 ± 0.04, n = 5; P < 0.0005) that was induced by TTX treatment (suppl. These results indicate that silencing AP firing increases synaptic GluA2-containing receptors via a protein synthesis-dependent process.We next determined the effect of spontaneous APs on CPEB3 expression in stellate cells. This treatment increased the rectification index of spontaneous EPSCs and elevated the current amplitude at +40 mV (suppl. In contrast GFP signals remained unaltered (suppl. Our results reveal a function for postsynaptic spiking activity in spatially defining the distribution of synaptic receptors and synaptic integration, highlighting the importance of CPEB3 expression in translating dendritic depolarization into differing expression patterns of synaptic AMPAR subtypes. This implies that activation of PKC should prevent the TTX-induced decrease in CPEB3. This implies that activation of PKC should prevent the TTX-induced decrease in CPEB3. Synaptic AMPARs are critical in determining the postsynaptic response, but are not uniformly distributed on dendrites. Thus synapses at distal dendrites have a higher rate of EPSP-AP coupling. However GluA2-lacking AMPARs exhibit paired pulse potentiation due to the release of polyamine block by the second stimulus, and therefore proximal synapses would respond more effectively to a train of stimuli, such as those evoked by sensory stimulation (suppl. The expression of somatic receptors is controlled by a different regulatory protein (s) than synaptic AMPARs (Bats et al , 2012), and may undergo a distinct form of activity-dependent regulation. Dendritic gradients have emerged as a common feature of neurons in the CNS. In addition to synaptic receptors, the density of voltage-gated ion channels also changes with dendritic distance (Hoffman et al , 1997; Kole et al , 2006; Magee, 1998; Norenberg et al , 2010; Sjostrom and Hausser, 2006). Complete details of experimental conditions, methods, and analysis are provided in Supplemental Experimental Procedures. Patch pipettes were filled with a solution containing (in mM): K-methylsulphonate 130, HEPES 10, NaCl 4, Mg2ATP 4, Tris2GTP 0.3, phosphocreatine 14, and Oregon Green BAPTA-1 (OGB-1) hexapotassium salt 0.1; the resistance of the electrodes was 4–6 MΩ. Cells were maintained for 18–27 days in vitro at 37°C in 5% CO2. ImmunocytochemistryCultured cerebellar neurons were washed in PBS and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS for 20 minutes. A full list of antibodies, staining conditions, and image acquisition and analysis is provided in the Supplemental Experimental Procedures. Statistical significance was assessed using ANOVA, repeated measures ANOVA, or Student’s t tests (paired, unpaired two-tailed or one sample) as appropriate if a data set passed the Shapiro-Wilk normality test. The Kolmogorov–Smirnov test was used for comparison of cumulative distribution plots. Summary of statistical analysis are shown in suppl. The decay time constant of synaptic currents increased with distance (Fig. Thus synaptic AMPA receptors change from largely GluA2-lacking at proximal, to GluA2-containing, at more distal synapses.Third, AMPA receptors that contain GluA2 subunits have a lower single channel conductance than GluA2-lacking receptors (Bats et al , 2012). 