The area of interest was positioned using as reference the wall of the third ventricle and the base of the brain. The background was obtained from adjacent nuclei that do not express NPY. We considered only the cells that had IOD values at least 3 times higher than that of background located in the adjacencies of the OVLT. We considered only the cells that had IOD values at least 3 times higher than that of background located in the adjacencies of the OVLT. We considered only the cells that had IOD values at least 3 times higher than that of background located in the adjacencies of the OVLT. For the quantification of Kiss1 mRNA we assessed the total IOD of a constant area, the IOD of individual cells and the number of cells located in the AVPV and in the Arc. Statistical analysis was performed using GraphPad Prism software, and an α value of 0.05 was considered in all analyses. Thus, we assessed the expression of the GnRH mRNA in neurons distributed around the OVLT, where we found a higher number of GnRH neurons expressing Fos. We found no differences in number of Kiss1 neurons, in total Kiss1 mRNA expression and in individual cells Kiss1 expression in the AVPV or in the Arc in any of the experimental groups (Fig.7A-H). Here we show that lesions of the PMV blunt the activation of AVPV and GnRH neurons during the afternoon of proestrus. However, we observed that the typical decrease in food intake that takes place in the transition from proestrus to estrus (Asarian and Geary, 2006) was altered in PMV-lesioned animals. The characteristic pattern of food intake across the estrous cycle is thought to be the consequence of fluctuations on estradiol levels (Drewett, 1973; Blaustein and Wade, 1976). We propose that the PMV is not directly regulating feeding pattern across estrous cycle, but the decreased levels of estrogen during the proestrus day may be the cause for the results obtained for food consumption. All experiments were carried out in accordance with the guidelines of the National Institute of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (1996) and Institutional Committee for Research and Animal Care of the University of São Paulo. Estrous cycle, body weight and food intakeThe estrous cycle was assessed daily by analysis of the vaginal cytology throughout the experiment. We measured food intake daily for 20 consecutive days (4-5 cycles) at the same time of the day (1:00 pm). Five series were collected and stored at −20°C. ImmunohistochemistryHypothalamic sections containing the preoptic area and the vascular organ of laminae terminalis (OVLT) were pretreated with hydrogen peroxide, blocked in 3% normal donkey serum, and incubated overnight at room temperature in anti-Fos polyclonal primary antisera raised in rabbit (Ab5, 1:70,000, Oncogene). Sections were incubated for 1 h in biotin-conjugated IgG donkey anti-rabbit (1:1,000, Jackson Laboratories) and for 1 h in avidin-biotin complex (1:500, Vector Labs). Sections were processed as described except that only DAB was used as chromogen.For pSTAT3 detection, immunoperoxidase reaction was performed as described except that sections were additionally pretreated in 0.3% glycine and 0.03% lauryl sulfate before primary incubation. Slides were dipped in NTB2 photographic emulsion (Kodak), dried, and stored at 4°C for 7-10 days. The Kiss1 probe was derived from PCR fragments amplified with iTaq DNA polymerase (Bio-Rad) from cDNA generated with the SuperScript III First-Strand Synthesis System for Rt-PCR (Invitrogen) from total mouse hypothalamic RNA. 