minigraph3 extends the minimap2 (84) alignment chaining model to work on graphs. Some indexes (132) support longer queries by doing extensive preprocessing. Instead of indexing the entire graph, the index may only contain k-mers from a simplified graph, or from specific paths of the graph. The length of this context is an effective upper bound for query length.The vBWT (88) took another approach to using the BWT for indexing VCF-based pangenome graphs. In this review, we consider an emerging class of bioinformatic methods that let us consider genetic diversity at every stage of analysis. When the search encounters a variant, it must branch to handle each allele separately. If a collection of haplotypes is available, the removed regions can be replaced with new subgraphs that contain separate paths for each distinct local haplotype (131). As with BWBBLE, k represents an effective upper bound for query length.The PSI (52) follows a similar approach with artificial paths. The graph positional BWT (gPBWT) (104) extends the PBWT model to haplotype walks embedded in complex sequence graphs. Then, we describe pangenomic models, with a particular focus on graphical ones (§3). We then survey index data structures that allow us to interact with them efficiently (§5). In addition, researchers have developed modified algorithms that run quickly in the practical context of real-world computer architectures (136, 118, 67). GraphAligner, GenomeMapper, Seven Bridges’ mapper, and V-MAP all use this strategy (120, 125, 116, 139). This makes it exceptionally fast, although it also can hurt alignment quality around indels. Seven Bridges first searches for a near-exact match using an exponential depth-first search, applying partial order alignment if this fails (116).Due to the recent development of these methods, there have been few independent comparative studies of their performance and accuracy. In general, VG compares favorably to other tools in terms of accuracy on NGS data (117). VG supports any type of variation, but its splicing-awareness is limited to splice junctions represented in the graph. However, to exchange graphical pangenomes, the community frequently uses a subset of version 1 of the Graphical Fragment Assembly format (GFAv1)7. GAM is produced by several other alignment tools (120, 68), and consumed by numerous downstream applications. Reduced reference bias and coherent representations of alleles yields significant improvements in structural variation detection and can decrease the runtime costs of genotyping. When our reference system is a linear genome, these two steps are often merged. However, this joint calling approach is expensive, and not applicable when we only have a few new genomes to reconstruct. Including known genetic variation in our pangenomic reference system can thus reduce bias towards the reference allele when genotyping heterozygous variants (Figure 3). The highly polymorphic and medically important human leukocyte antigen (HLA) genes have received an especially large amount of attention. HLA*LA (36), Kourami (79), and HISAT-genotype (72) have all demonstrated techniques for genotyping HLA genes by aligning NGS reads to a graph encoding various HLA alleles. This inaccurate representation has led to the development of diploid assembly methods. A mapping bias in favor of one of the alleles can therefore create illusory differences in expression between the alleles. Variant-aware mappers like GSNAP (143), iMapSplice (87), ASElux (91), and HISAT2 (72) remove this necessity, and have been shown to reduce reference bias at known SNVs during mapping (23, 87). Variant-aware mappers like GSNAP (143), iMapSplice (87), ASElux (91), and HISAT2 (72) remove this necessity, and have been shown to reduce reference bias at known SNVs during mapping (23, 87). Variation-aware analysis of RNA-seq data is also important for accurately analyzing highly polymorphic regions, such as HLA. Variation-aware analysis of RNA-seq data is also important for accurately analyzing highly polymorphic regions, such as HLA. Their construction is often guided more by application than a clear ground truth. Many of the works we have considered forsee a future in which reference systems are graphical, but only a handful (primarily those based on variation graphs) produce alignments or genotype calls in the context of a pangenome graph. If so, these reference systems are likely to proliferate as we explore the pangenome of humans and other species. Resequencing methods that use a pangenomic reference system should not be subject to this limitation. Pangenomic models Walks through a sequence graph thus include the set of sequences from which it was built. Regions of the graph where multiple paths connect a common head and tail node, often referred to as bubbles (109), represent variation. The feature which makes these methods efficient, the fixed k on which they are based, also limits their resolution of repetitive genomic features. 