The values used for data processing were the gram force values corresponding to each filament number. To determine if this topographic targeting was a result of the route of neurotrophin application (DRG or spinal cord expression) or the neurotrophin itself, we expressed NGF, artemin, or GDNF within the spinal cord or DRG after dorsal root injury. Visualization was achieved by incubating sections in biotinylated secondary antibody (except for IB4 as it is already biotinylated) followed by vectastain Elite ABC reagents (Vector laboratories, Burlingame, CA), and developed using the peroxidase substrate, 3,3-diaminobenzidine to generate brown color. cFos images captured at 10x was used for cFos counting. All quantification of images were performed by a trained student who was unaware of the individual treatments. Laser scanning confocal microscopy for CTB labeled axonsImages from CTB labeled sections were acquired using confocal microscopy (Nikon C2). Consistent with previous observations, gene expression was restricted within the dorsal horn on the injected side of the spinal cord. In contrast to adenoviral injections, lentiviral injections showed little tissue damage or cytotoxicity. Differential targeting of regenerating axons by NGF or arteminIn normal spinal cord the distribution of CGRP+ fibers is restricted to the superficial dorsal horn (Fig. Excitingly, spinal cord expression of artemin induced physiologically restricted and topographically targeted regeneration of CGRP+ fibers within the superficial dorsal horn (Fig. Regeneration of myelinated sensory afferents was examined by injecting cholera toxin B (Robertson and Grant, 1985) into the sciatic nerve. The coding regions of alternatively- spliced form of rat GDNF (GDNF555, NCBI reference # S75585.1) and rat GFRα1 (NCBI reference # NM_012959) were kindly supplied by Amgen. Accumulated viral particles from the supernatant were purified by sucrose gradient ultracentrifugation to produce high titer in vivo quality lentivirus. In normal uninjured animals, the majority of cFos expression was localized to the superficial dorsal horn (lamina I&II) (Fig. 7A & F); whereas, after lesioning dorsal roots L3–L6, cFos is virtually absent in GFP lesion controls (Fig. Virus was resuspended in a Tris buffer containing rat serum albumin and mannitol. In the case of GDNF, cFos immunoreactivity was very low and they were distributed randomly without a clear pattern (Fig. Similarly, we also expressed GFRα1, the cognate receptor for GDNF, along with GDNF in the spinal dorsal horn (Fig. 8D & d) to evaluate whether the effects on targeting is influenced by expression of GDNF family of receptors or depends on the phenotype of regenerating axons (CGRP fibers in NGF or artemin vs. IB4 fibers in GDNF). Artemin and NGF have flag tags and GFRα3 has a myc tag. The production of exogenous artemin and GFRα3 was confirmed by probing Western blots for flag (anti-M2 flag (1:1000), Sigma) and myc antibody (9E10 (1:1000), Cell Center, UPENN), respectively. By day 50, comparison of artemin+NGF or artemin+ GFRα3 to baseline control values from day zero (before crush) were statistically significant (δp<0.05), as determined by a one way ANOVA, indicating mild hyperalgesia (Dunnett’s multiple comparison test). The lack of robust IB4 regeneration in these groups might be contributing to the absence of allodynia (Zhang et al , 2013a). With the use of #5 Dumont forceps, triple-crush lesions, 10 seconds each, were inflicted at two sites separated by 3mm along the L4 and L5 afferents at 5–8 mm from the DREZ. These data indicate a topographic targeting of synapses to their normal laminar locations. Here we show, in the presence of artemin, ectopic expression of GFR-α3 within the spinal cord can alter the growth of axons, thus possibly functioning through a similar trans mechanism. Buprenorphine was administered intramuscularly (0.05 mg/kg) following surgery to help alleviate pain and discomfort.Injections to Dorsal root gangliaIn animals under anesthesia, a 3cm skin incision was made on the dorsal midline starting from the superior iliac crest and extending in the rostral direction. The muscle was separated to expose the sciatic nerve. The sciatic nerve was injected with 2–3 μl of 2% cholera toxin B subunit using a Hamilton syringe with a 30 gauge needle. The sciatic nerve was injected with 2–3 μl of 2% cholera toxin B subunit using a Hamilton syringe with a 30 gauge needle. Right side L4/L5 crush increased PWL close to the cut off value and raising the ratio to a value closer to 2. A ratio significantly lower than the baseline ratio is represented as hyperalgesia. Since GFRα3 is bound to the membrane by a glycophosphatidylinositol anchor, one could envision injury inducing release and soluble artemin/GFR-α3 complex. Pressure to the paw was applied at thirty two grams per second. Pressure to the paw was applied at thirty two grams per second. Gridwalk testA custom made horizontal ladder with irregularly spaced rungs was used to test for proprioception. Animals were placed on a wire mesh floor and fruit cereals were provided during this behavioral testing. Animals were placed on a wire mesh floor and fruit cereals were provided during this behavioral testing. Each monofilament was applied in a smooth and steady manner over a two second period until it bends. 