Variable rates of chromosome mis-segregation were observed in the original hybrid strains both for different Robertsonian translocations and in male and female mice ranging from 4 to 26% when mating two compound heterozgyotes (Gropp et al  1974). Consistent with this idea is the observation that while only half of the pregnancies aimed at obtaining trisomy 16 and trisomy 19 yielded trisomic embryos when harvested between E13.5 and E15.5, nearly all contain resorbed embryos. We complement our studies of constitutional trisomic HSCs with the analysis of HSCs harboring random aneuploidies that are generated by mouse models with increased rates of chromosome mis-segregation. Additionally, leukemias and lymphomas are often transplantable and amenable to manipulation in culture, making this a potentially powerful system to assess the role of cellular aneuploidy in tumorigenesis in the future without requiring repeated isolations of trisomic fetal liver cells. This system will greatly expand the range of our in vivo analysis model, allowing us to assess the combinations of many aneuploidies and oncogenes on the kinetics of transformation in leukemia and lymphoma in mice and enabling us to test the effect of aneuploidy-targeting drugs (Tang et al  2011) in aneuploid blood cancers. We hope that our findings and future work using this system will help clarify the effects of aneuploidy in DS and provide insight into the precise role of aneuploidy in cancer. Taken together, HSCs provide a tractable cellular system to study the effects of aneuploidy in vivo for several reasons. Because we are particularly interested in evaluating the effects of aneuploidy on cellular fitness in vivo, we sought to utilize this transplantation system in particular to study trisomic HSCs. Indeed, matings of these feral strains with different laboratory strains led to strain-specific differences in trisomic embryo survival (Gropp et al  1983). Such large genomic alterations affect a multitude of cellular processes, from transcription and translation, to protein folding and degradation. Such large genomic alterations affect a multitude of cellular processes, from transcription and translation, to protein folding and degradation. Backcrossing the Robertsonian strains into an inbred line both reduces lethality due to histoincompatibility and ensures the phenotypes observed are due to differences in the donor HSCs and not a consequence of delayed graft rejection in the recipients. Timed matings were employed to harvest trisomic embryos at E13.5 or E14.5, when HSCs could be readily isolated from fetal livers. 