All the cells recorded in the three groups, Dlx5/6-eGFP, Nkx2-1 GOF and Nkx2-1/Dlx2 GOF displayed age-appropriate resting membrane potential (-63.73±1.73) and exhibited intrinsic firing properties consistent with native cINs originating from MGE or CGE (Figure 5).Specifically, when recording the Dlx5/6-eGFP transplanted cells (n=3) we identified two non-fast spiking interneurons and one that possessed CGE-derived character, which we have previously described as a sigmoid bursting cell (sIB) (Miyoshi et al , 2010). By contrast, in Lmo3 null animals the total number of Pv+ cINs was significantly reduced and there was a slight increase in SST+ cINs (Figure 7C and D). Neither the overall number of MGE type cINs or the their layer distribution was significantly altered in mutants (Figure 7D and Figure S12A–C). The observation that co-recruitment of Nkx2-1 and Dlx2 greatly enhances the induction of cortical interneurons demonstrates that the directed differentiation of ES cells can be enhanced by the appropriate use of genes known to play a role in cIN differentiation. Our subsequent analysis of the Lmo3 null animal revealed a significant reduction in Pv+ cINs and an increase in SST+ cINs without significantly affecting the overall number of MGE type cINs. This is consistent with our findings that Lhx6 in situ was normal in e15.5 cortex (Figure S14) and layer distribution postnatally for Pv+ and SST+ cINs was normal in Lmo3 null mice (Figure S12B–E). Old SFEB medium was removed and 800 μl of new SFEB containing Dkk-1 and SHH N-terminus (R&D Systems; 5mM) was added. Medium was changed similarly every 3 days until day 11, at which point embryoid bodies were dissociated for subsequent experiments. Cells were maintained the in the same SFEB medium as floating embryoid cultures, with medium changed at the same intervals. Cells were maintained the in the same SFEB medium as floating embryoid cultures, with medium changed at the same intervals. Cultures were fixed at day 11 for immunocytochemistry.For neuronal monolayer cultures, day 11 EBs were gently and completely dissociated with Accutase (15 minutes, 37°C followed by gentle trituration with P200 tip 10-15x) and plated at 200 000 cells/cm2 on poly-L-lysine/laminin and maintained in Neurobasal + B27 medium. Briefly, day 9 EBs were gently dissociated with Accutase (15 minutes, 37°C followed by gentle trituration with a P200 tip) and then incubated with adeno-associated virus encoding CAG-eGFP for 3 hours in suspension. Following surgery, the uterus was carefully replaced and the dam was sewn up, allowing host pups to be birthed normally. At postnatal day 21, host animals were anesthetized and transcardially perfused in preparation for immunohistochemical analysis. Either constitutive or conditional removal of Nkx2-1 from the MGE results in a trans-fating of cortical interneurons produced from this structure to a CGE identity. ES cell derived cortical interneurons exhibit properties of in vivo cINsCortical interneuron progenitors engrafted in utero into their site of origin exhibit a specialized migratory behavior into the neocortex (Butt et al , 2005; Nery et al , 2002; Wichterle et al , 2001). It also indicates that our in vivo transplantation approach provides a stringent test for the production of bona fide ES-derived cortical interneurons.Work by the group of Yoshiki Sasai has demonstrated that mouse ES cells can be directed towards a telencephalic progenitor fate through early suppression of Wnt signaling (Watanabe et al , 2005). Establishing an ES cell reporter line for cortical interneuron differentiationUsing these previously established methods as a starting point, it is clear that, contrary to unspecified neural stem cells, at least a small proportion can be differentiated into cortical interneuron progenitors by exposure to appropriate extrinsic signaling factors - progenitors that demonstrate appropriate migratory behavior and exhibit mature cIN phenotypes. There was, however, a significant enhancement in the total number of cINs present in the cortex with Nkx2-1 GOF, an effect that mirrored the increase in Dlx5/6-eGFP+ neurons when the lines were differentiated in vivo. This effect was even greater with the addition of Dlx2 (Nkx2-1/Dlx2 GOF) where we observed a further increase in the number of cINs that reached the cortex (Figure 4G). 