Circadian Rhythms and Metabolism These patterns on a systemic level appear to be temporally coordinated by neuronal and chemical networks which are in turn maintained by various timekeeping mechanisms in the central nervous system (Figure 1) [7]. Another study, where two groups of obese women were randomized to consuming an isocaloric meal during breakfast or dinner, showed that high-calorie breakfast consumers had much better fasting glucose, insulin sensitivity, and improved lipid profile compared to the high-calorie dinner consumers [69]. The timing of food intake has as much of an impact, if not more, on energy homeostasis as the nutritional content of the diet and gut signaling. EECs contain multiple nutrient-dependent receptors, many of which are GPCRs, that can trigger depolarization and fluctuation in intracellular calcium and, hence, the secretion of gut peptides such as incretins, peptide YY, cholecystokinin, gastrin, serotonin, neurotensin, or secretin. Many of these peptides can then activate afferent enteric neurons, as well as work in an endocrine fashion. Polyamines also regulate the activity of core clock proteins by modulating the interaction of PER2 and CRY1 [81]. Ambient light is detected by specialized retinal ganglion cells that project to SCN neurons via the retinohypothalamic tract, as well as through multi-synaptic, indirect pathways via the thalamus [12]. Furthermore, in mice, FXR activation in hepatocytes, or FXR-mediated release of fibroblast growth factor 15 (FGF15) from the terminal ileum, play a modulatory role in lipid and glucose homeostasis [87]. TGR5 (G protein-coupled bile acid receptor 1, GPBAR1), another BA receptor, also plays an important regulatory role in host metabolism [88]. Recent studies show that the gut microbiome is far more dynamic than previously imagined. In addition, the dynamic fluctuations in the gut micro-biome can lead to cyclical fluctuation of primary and secondary BAs which can modulate FXR and TGR5 activation and downstream signaling, affecting energy expenditure and influencing cholesterol, lipid, and glucose homeostasis. Sleep/wake homeostasis has been far more difficult to study. Sleep/wake homeostasis has been far more difficult to study. The synchrony of these oscillating networks with endocrine and enteroendocrine hormones, and neuronal input at the system level, and with the cellular machinery at the single-cell level, likely synchronizes distant organs and discordant cellular processes. Circadian Regulators and Metabolism These proteins, expressed in nearly every eukaryotic cell as well as in some prokaryotic organisms, allow each individual cell to have an autonomous, self-sustained mechanism to keep track of a 24 h day [6]. Feeding has a wide-ranging impact on rhythmic hepatic gene expression [28]. Moreover, post-prandial thermogenesis can also activate heat-shock factors, which subsequently modulate transcription of clock components. However, in the absence of any food intake only ~350 hepatic transcripts are rhythmic in a 24 h period [28]. At a cultural level, with the advent of electricity, modern humans are exposed to far more prolonged illumination [19]. 