SEPT9, with demonstrated roles in both cancer and neurological disease, provides an illustration of the diversity of human septin loci. The cellular localization of SEPT9 isoforms is largely cytoplasmic in interphase cells, but the SEPT9_v1 isoform has a bipartite nuclear localization signal that may direct the shuttling of SEPT9_v1 between the nucleus and the cytoplasm. SEPT9 is no exception, as it was originally called MLL septin-like fusion (MSF) due to the fact that it was identified as a fusion partner of MLL in leukemias (66). Some research groups published with the old nomenclature while others used their own versions, making progress in SEPT9 research hard to reconcile. These nomenclature changes are depicted in Table 4 by group and year. Throughout this review the nomenclature utilized was established in 2005 by Scott et al  and endorsed at the 2009 International Septin Meeting(76). Lost from the carboxy terminus of MLL is the PHD zinc finger protein-protein interaction domain and the SET domain thought to regulate gene expression through chromatin remodeling (66, 84). However, all of the well-characterized MLL fusion products produce in-frame translated chimeric proteins associated with phenotypic disease variability such as leukemia type and prognostic outcome which provide further evidence that proteins at the varying reciprocally translocated chromosomes are essential contributors to the pathogenesis of leukemia (67, 68, 85). As a result of these studies, SEPT9 is now accepted as a novel cancer associated protein and is emerging as a potential biomarker for diagnosis and chemotherapeutic response in some epithelial cancers. These genes were further characterized in Saccharomyces pombe in which mutations led to cytokinesis defects during mitotis. Ihara et al  demonstrated that expression of murine Sept4 is important for the cortical organization required for morphology and motility of the sperm flagellum (43). Septins as microtubule associated proteins SEPT4 has also been implicated in brain pathogenesis by its association with cytoplasmic inclusions in Parkinson’s disease and other synocleinopathies (52). The mechanism by which these mutations are pathogenic in HNA is still not fully elucidated, but McDade et al  showed that isoforms v4 and v4* have distinct 5′ ends encoded by exons where germline mutations of HNA are found. Septins in cancer Subsequently, SEPT9/MSF, SEPT6, SEPT2, and SEPT11 were also identified as fusion partners with MLL in human leukemic cells (63–66). MLL, the human homolog of Drosophila trithorax, is a common translocation partner in leukemias with more than 80 rearrangements with 50 fusion partners identified (67). In addition, SEPT2 is the only human septin that has been associated with a specific human cancer predisposition syndrome, Von Hippel-Lindau (VHL). 