Rabbits did not demonstrate signs of ocular discomfort at any point after particle injection. Topical CAIs require multiple daily doses and can cause irritation and blurriness on instillation. Isoforms II, III, IV, and XII are present in the ciliary processes of the eye,11 where CA II and CA XII are involved in aqueous humor production11 and regulation of IOP. Molecular weight was monitored by gel permeation chromatography (JASCO AS-1555, Tokyo, Japan) with three columns in series (Waters, Milford, MA; Styragel guard column, 4.6 mm i.d. Ion Pair and Microparticle PreparationDorzolamide ion pairs were created by dissolving 7.5 mg of dorzolamide in 1 mL of water. The SDS or SO solution was then added in a dropwise manner to the dorzolamide solution. Triethylamine (TEA) was added to the PEG3-PSA mixture, and all mixtures were homogenized (L4RT, Silverson Machines, East Longmeadow, MA) at 6,000 rpm for 1 min into 100 mL of an aqueous solution containing 1% poly(vinyl alcohol) (25 kDa, Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). The needle was connected to a manometer (DigiMano1000, Netech, Farmingdale, NY) and reservoir containing balanced salt solution (BSS). Measurements were made for manometer readings between 4 and 24 mmHg. Daily use of eye drops reduces vision loss due to glaucoma, but its success is hindered by poor patient adherence, preservative and medication toxicity, and limited bioavailability. In the Travatan Dosing Aid Study, nearly half of the patients used their drops less than 75% of the time,7 as judged by an electronic monitoring device. The TonoVet was used according to the manufacturer’s instructions with the magnetic probe in a horizontal position. All measurements occurred between 10 a.m. and 12 p.m., were performed by the same technician, and took place in the rabbit housing room. Prior to measurements, each rabbit was restrained for at least 3 min. If there was more than 2 mmHg of variation between measurements of an individual eye, the rabbit was allowed to acclimate for 3 more minutes before repeat measurement. Following enucleation, eyes were exposed to a sucrose gradient and frozen in optimal cutting temperature compound (Sakura Finetek, Torrance, CA) and serially cut into sections of 10 μm thickness. Total fluorescence at the injection site was recorded at 500/600 nm, and images were analyzed using Living Image 3.0 software (Caliper Lifesciences, Inc.). Statistical AnalysisAll values are mean ± standard deviation (SD). The disincentives to ideal eye drop adherence include the fact that they provide no detectable benefit to the patient in terms of symptom relief. Preparation and Characterization of MicroparticlesDorzolamide and brinzolamide are hydrophilic compounds that were resistant to encapsulation into PLGA, with loading of 0.5% (10.9 ± 5.3 μm in diameter) and 1.8% (9.7 ± 2.7 μm in diameter) by weight on initial attempts, respectively (Table 1). 