The mixture was then heated slowly to 110 °C and kept at the same temperature for 1 h to produce a suspension. Subsequently, another promising candidate 3-hydroxymethyl-4-methyl-DCK (3, HMDCK) showed moderate bioavailabity, but lacked activity in a drug resistant strain.8 Guided by SAR and 3D-QSAR results,9 our research efforts next focused on the development of drug candidates with better pharmacokinetic profiles and potent anti HIV-1 drug-resistant activity. The crude product could be used in the next reaction without further purification. The supernatants were collected seven days post-infection and tested for p24 antigen by ELISA as described above. As stated above, because 4 is a good potential drug candidate for preclinical studies, a practical synthesis for scale-up of 4 is merited and has been developed. The total yield of 4 was significantly increased from 7.8% in the original seven-step synthesis6 to 32% in the new ten-step synthesis with optimized conditions, as shown in Scheme 1 and Table 1. The plasma samples obtained were stored at −20 °C until analysis. Data for each pharmacokinetic parameter were averaged and reported as mean ± standard deviation. The monolayers were pre-incubated at 37 °C for 30 min in a CO2 incubator with pre-warmed transport media. Condensation of 8 with acetone in the presence of pyrrolidine yielded the fused angular pyranocoumarin 9 in an 81% yield. Additionally, this modified route to the key intermediate 11 has additional advantages for scale-up synthesis: it avoids production of the linear isomer, does not require chromatographic purification, and eliminates use of the costly reagent 3-chloro-3-methylbutyne-1 and the environmental contaminant N,N-diethylaniline. Compound 12 was treated with N-bromosuccinimide at a mole ratio of 1:1.2 in refluxing benzene for 4 h to produce exclusively 3-bromomethyl-4-methyl-DCK (13)4, 6 in 97% yield. However, increasing numbers of HIV/AIDS patients on HAART regimens fail to respond to current antiretroviral drugs due to the emergence of drug-resistant HIV mutants.1 Therefore, it is essential to develop additional potent anti-HIV drugs with novel mechanisms of action or resistance profiles different from those of current anti-HIV therapeutics. Other phase-transfer catalysts, including benzyltriethylammonium chloride, methyltriethylammonium chloride, dibenzo-18-crown-6, and cetyltrimethylammonium chloride, were also investigated in the two-phase reaction system (data not shown), but Bu4N+I− gave better results. Pharmacokinetic parameters were calculated by non-compartmental analysis by using DAS Version 2.0. The modified synthesis gave a high overall yield of 32%, with minimized isomer formation, simplified purification, and elimination of high-cost reagents and toxic solvents, thus providing clear advantages for further scale-up synthesis. 