The RNAi Consortium clone IDs for the shRNAs used in this study are as follows: shMITF: TRCN0000329793 (CGGGAAACTTGATTGATCTTT), TRCN0000019122 (CGTGGACTATATCCGAAAGTT); shTFEB: TRCN0000013108 (CCCACTTTGGTGCTAATAGCT), TRCN0000013109 (CGATGTCCTTGGCTACATCAA). shRNA constructs against human TFE3 were generated by annealing oligonucleotides against human TFE3 (corresponding to the sequence of the siRNA described below) into the AgeI and EcoRI sites of pLKO.1-puro vector. Stock solutions of AA were made from individual powders. Samples were clarified by centrifugation and protein content measured using BCA protein assay kit (Thermo Scientific). 30 mg protein was resolved on 9% SDS-PAGE gels and transferred onto PVDF membranes (GE Healthcare Life Sciences, Pittsburgh, PA). Immune complexes were washed and analyzed via SDS-PAGE and western blotting. Immunoglobulin G antibody was used as a control. To clarify homogenates, samples were centrifuged at 20K x g, for 7 minutes at 4°C. 600μL of Choloroform (stabilized with amylene) was added to each sample, one at a time, and the sample was immediately vortexed at RT for 30 seconds, and then placed on ice. Samples were analyzed in triplicate. Slides were mounted on glass slides using Vectashield (Vector Laboratories) and imaged on a spinning disk confocal system (Perkin Elmer) or a Zeiss Laser Scanning Microscope (LSM) 710. Commercially available MITF antibodies for IHC are specific to the melanoma (MITF-M) isoform or cross-react with other MiT/TFE family members. Specimens were then washed three times in PBST and treated with ABC reagent (Vectastain ABC kit #PK-6100) for 30 min, followed by three washes for 3 min each. Briefly, the tissue was post-fixed in osmium tetroxide, stained En Bloc with uranyl acetate, dehydrated in graded ethanol solutions, infiltrated with propylene oxide/Epon mixtures, embedded in pure Epon, and polymerized over night at 60°C. Thin sections were cut with an LKB 8801 ultramicrotome and diamond knife, stained with lead citrate, and examined in a FEI Morgagni transmission electron microscope. One micron sections were cut, stained with toluidine blue, and examined by light microscopy. Representative areas were chosen for electron microscopic study and the Epon blocks were trimmed accordingly. Cells were rinsed 3 times to remove excess dye, and chased for 2 hrs in media free of Dx-OG514, which results in the selective accumulation of Dx-OG514 in lysosomes. PCR reactions were performed in triplicate and the relative amount of cDNA was calculated by the comparative CT method using the 18S ribosomal RNA sequences as a control. MITF isoform specific PCR was conducted as previously described 37. Chromatin extraction and DNA sonication were conducted according to manufacturer’s protocol. Image analysis and StatisticsImage analysis, including densitometry and measurement of fluorescence intensity, was conducted using Image J software (NIH). A p value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. Proteins were then precipitated with tricholoracetic acid, resuspended in 50 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and 1 M urea and digested first with endoproteinase Lys-C (Wako) for 17 hours at room temperature and then with sequencing-grade trypsin (Promega) for 6 hours at 37 °C. To achieve this, peptides were dried and resuspended in 50 μl of 200 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and 30 % acetonitrile (ACN) and 10 μg of the TMT in reagent in 5 μl of anhydrous ACN was added to the solution, which was incubated at room temperature (RT) for one hour. The reaction was then quenched by adding 6 μl of 5 % (w/v) hydroxylamine in 200 mM HEPES (pH 8.5) and incubation for 15 min at RT. The solutions were acidified by adding 50 μl of 1 % trifluoroacetic acid (TFA) and samples that were quantified in one mass spectrometry measurement were pooled before being subjected to desalting over a Sep-Pak C18 (SPE) cartridge. The fragment ions were further fragmented using the HCD fragmentation (normalized collision energy, 50 %) and the MS3 spectrum was acquired in the Orbitrap (resolution, 60,000; AGC target, 5×104; maximum injection time, 250 ms).Data analysis was performed on an on an in-house generated SEQUEST-based47 software platform. Using the target-decoy database search strategy48 a spectra assignment false discovery rate of less than 1 % was achieved through using linear discriminant analysis with a single discriminant score calculated from the following SEQUEST search score and peptide sequence properties: mass deviation, XCorr, dCn, number of missed trypsin cleavages, and peptide length49. Only MS3 with an average signal-to-noise value of larger than 28 per reporter ion as well as with an isolation specificity44 of larger than 0.75 were considered for quantification. Histograms show the amount of immunoprecipitated DNA detected by qPCR normalized to input and plotted as relative enrichment over mock control. In order to uncover machinery that overrides cytoplasmic retention mechanisms, we employed affinity purification and quantitative proteomics12 to identify PDA-specific TFE3-interacting proteins. The graphs show normalized protein intensities in the FLAG-TFE3 and control samples. Similar effects were observed for both MITF and TFEB upon combined IPO8 and IPO7 knockdown (Fig. These findings suggest that Importins may regulate the stability of MiT/TFE proteins in addition to facilitating their nuclear transport. TFE3 knockdown or BafA1 treatment resulted in dramatic decreases in fluorescent puncta co-localized with LAMP2 (14.8 ± 6.1 spots/cell in siCTRL vs 3.7 ± 1.8 and 0.2 ± 0.7 spots/cell in siTFE3 and BafA1 respectively, Fig. Significantly, knockdown of TFE3 and MITF virtually abolished xenograft tumor growth of Panc1 and 8988T cells, and PL18 cells, respectively (Fig. 