Nonhuman primates are similar to humans with respect to reproductive pathophysiology, including maturation, HPG axis regulation of reproductive function, hormone metabolism, and responses to estrogens, progestogens, androgens, and other hormonally active agents. An integrative approach to reproductive system assessments is more informative than histopathology alone and ideally should include baseline confirmation of age and reproductive life stage, in-life assessments of reproductive parameters, serum hormone measurements, and a thorough and consistent gross pathology protocol. In the wild, reproductive function is governed by matrilineal social rank and animal-to-animal agonistic interactions that act through the HPG axis to suppress reproductive function in subordinate animals. In this estrogen-dominant state without the mucous differentiation caused by progesterone, islands of stratified squamous epithelium form under the normal columnar mucous epithelium of the endocervix (Figure 8).113Proliferative lesions of the cervix and vagina most often occur near the squamocolumnar junction or transition zone of the cervix and are usually associated with papillomavirus infection.114 Lesions are focal or multifocal and may be warty and exophytic, plaque-like, or endophytic. Histologically, lesions consist of varying mixtures of basal cell hyperplasia, koilocytic change, anisokaryosis, and atypia (Figure 9). Papillomavirus lesions may progress to invasive squamous cell carcinoma.113 In addition to papillomavirus-associated lesions, a condylomatous lesion of the external genitalia has been identified in cynomolgus macaques of Mauritian origin; this lesion is not associated with papillomavirus infection and lacks dysplasia and atypia. Assess and record maturity and cycle stageUse immunohistochemistry to assess location and degree of proliferative responses (KI67) and estrogen responses (PR). Testicular size can be measured by ultrasound or using calipers. It is widely recognized that water quality is an economic driver.126 Clean water is essential for human and livestock health, and for business development, factories, schools, and agriculture. Fish were obtained using backpack or boat-mounted electrofishing (pulsed direct current). Up to 10 male black bass (Micropterus spp), 10 male sunfish (Lepomis spp), and 10 male catfish (Ictaluridae) were collected at each site whenever possible. Any obvious females were released back into the river. Testes were either embedded whole (small specimens) or representative cross sections were taken. After processing, tissue specimens were embedded in paraffin, sectioned at 5 μm, and stained using hematoxylin and eosin. After processing, tissue specimens were embedded in paraffin, sectioned at 5 μm, and stained using hematoxylin and eosin. 138 Whenever possible, 5 cross sections of testis were examined from each fish for testicular oocytes. However, testes from the smaller fish were sometimes embedded longitudinally, and only 3 sections were available for analysis. Oocytes observed within the seminiferous tubules were predominantly in the previtellogenic, chromatin nucleolus stage and were scored at × 10 objective magnification from 1 to 4, with 4 being the most severe (Figure 14). In our most recent assessment, largemouth bass at several Pee Dee River sites closer to the coast had 90% intersex occurrence. Interestingly, the sunfish (Lepomis spp such as bluegills, redbreast, and redear sunfish) had, on average, less than 20% of the intersex prevalence seen in Micropterus, and intersex in catfish was only rarely detected. Micropterus spp also showed higher intersex severity scores on average, with a greater representation of 3 and 4 seconds. In the Yadkin-Pee Dee River basin of North Carolina and South Carolina, principle component analysis identified waterborne PAHs as the contaminants most correlated with intersex occurrence and severity in both Micropterus and Lepomis spp. Even so, there are still several questions that need to be answered, such as: (1) Is there some unique characteristic of black bass that makes them pre-disposed to the intersex condition? Phthalates are environmentally ubiquitous endocrine active chemicals that have established antiandrogenic effects, and human in utero exposure to phthalates is known to reduce fetal serum testosterone- and androgen-dependent outcomes.150,151 Further, early life exposure to phthalates is increasingly linked to the development of allergic disorders in children.152 However, the association between the antiandrogenic nature of phthalates and the increased prevalence of allergic disease has not been established. Reproductive Consequences in Adult Female Mice Following Developmental Estrogen Exposure: An Estrogen Receptor α-Mediated Estrogen Response, by Wendy N. Jefferson, Alisa A. Suen and Carmen J. Williams Several phenotypes in this animal model replicate findings in humans. All Six1-expressing epithelial cell populations expand with age, and increased Six1 transcript and protein expression closely correlates with the appearance of uterine cancer.63 Examination of human endometrial tissue revealed a similar spectrum of cells that express Six1 and/or coexpress CK14/CK18. In contrast, over 50% of DEGs have differential H3K27ac at the TSS, suggesting this mark likely plays a role in gene expression differences. To address these uncertainties, an interagency collaboration between the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences’ National Toxicology Program and the US Food and Drug Administration created the Consortium Linking Academic and Regulatory Insights on BPA Toxicity (CLARITY-BPA) to perform a comprehensive Good Laboratory Practice (GLP)-compliant 2-year chronic exposure study of the toxicity of BPA.69 The regulatory toxicity study forming the backbone for CLARITY-BPA was supplemented by hypothesis-driven academic investigator-initiated studies that analyzed a wide array of additional end points. Results of those studies demonstrated significant and, most often, sex-specific effects of BPA on a variety of reproductive, metabolic, immune, and cardiovascular-related end points.74,78-81 In the heart, minor exposure-related increases in heart weight, left ventricular (LV) wall thickness, and modest changes in collagen content in the extracellular matrix of hearts in males exposed to 430 and 4400 μg BPA/kg body weight/d were detected. 