Another well-studied example in which some of these phenomena are evident is the assembly of secreted immunoglobulin, which requires the formation of disulphide bonds between heavy chains (HCs) and light chains (LCs). Substrate targeting When the ER is stressed, BiP can be titrated away to bind to misfolded substrates, in turn activating Ire1 (see figure, step 1). The processed mRNA is re-ligated by a tRNA ligase, Trl1, and translated. Hac1 then translocates into the nucleus, binds to UPR elements (UPREs) and possibly other sequences in the promoter region of target genes, and upregulates their expression.In higher eukaryotes, the UPR consists of three transducers, IRE1, PERK and activating transcription factor-6 (ATF6) (not shown)157. Here, it is proteolytically processed by the S1P and S2P intramembrane proteases to release the ATF6-fragment transcription factor. Here, it is proteolytically processed by the S1P and S2P intramembrane proteases to release the ATF6-fragment transcription factor. Here, it is proteolytically processed by the S1P and S2P intramembrane proteases to release the ATF6-fragment transcription factor. Here, it is proteolytically processed by the S1P and S2P intramembrane proteases to release the ATF6-fragment transcription factor. It is unclear whether the EDEMs exhibit substrate specificity, whether every EDEM homologue acts as a mannosidase and whether binding to a distinct mannose-trimmed protein species is essential for substrate selection.Yos9 was uncovered in a genetic screen to identify components that participate in glycoprotein turnover87. The C-terminal Gly of Ub is adenylated by the E1 and then displaced following the nucleophilic attack of a conserved Cys residue in the E1, resulting in a thioester linkage between the E1 and Ub (see figure). Protein ubiquitylation, and thus proteasome-dependent degradation, requires the action of an E1 ubiquitin-activating enzyme, E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes and E3 ubiquitin ligases (BOX 3). Both enzymes contain catalytic RING domains and exhibit somewhat different preferences for unique E2 ubiquitin-conjugating enzymes: Doa10-dependent ubiquitylation requires Ubc6 and Ubc7 (REF. Although the proteasome is sufficient in a few cases to retrotranslocate substrates122,123, another cytoplasmic protein complex, the cell-division cycle-48 (Cdc48) complex, has a more pivotal role in substrate retrotranslocation in both yeast and mammals124. RING domainA Cys-rich tandem zinc-finger domain of 40−60 amino acids that is found in the RING E3 enzymes, a main class of E3 ubiquitin ligases.HECT domain(Homologous to E6AP C terminus domain). A domain in the second largest class of E3 ubiquitin ligases. Two models were proposed to explain this observation: either TCR subunits are targeted to an unknown compartment for degradation or a specific protease resides within the ER10. Two factors in this class, Rad23 and Dsk2, increase ERAD efficiency108,131. It is unknown whether any of these factors are static members of the Cdc48 complex, or whether they bind to and deliver ERAD substrates to the proteasome by acting as mobile escorts.Ubiquitin receptors that are residents of the 19S proteasome subunit have also been identified. Members of this growing family of enzymes can catalyse the en bloc removal of polyubiquitin moieties or catalyse the trimming of the polyubiquitin chain136. Furthermore, induction of the heat-shock response in yeast can compensate for ER stress that is caused by the overexpression of Cpy* in cells that lack inositol-requiring protein-1 (Ire1) (REF. In the event that ER stress cannot be resolved, the apoptotic pathway can be induced. Several models have been proposed to explain how ER stress is linked to apoptosis. However, based on the studies evaluated in this review, it should be obvious that the field has matured quickly. Nevertheless, many original questions remain unanswered. Overall, based on the pace at which new discoveries have been made, we suspect that even these questions can be answered in the coming years. Potential ERAD substrates include soluble and integral membrane proteins, polypeptides that have failed to become post-translationally modified or are otherwise damaged or misfolded, and unassembled members of multiprotein complexes. In some cases, the two chaperone systems even have unique effects on the fate of a substrate50-53. Furthermore, budding yeast lack UGGT but exhibit most other aspects of glycoprotein quality control and ERAD. One recently characterized human PDI homologue, ERDJ5, contains four canonical thioredoxin-like active-site Cys-X-X-Cys motifs and is a BIP cofactor28. ERDJ5 regulates the degradation of null Hong Kong (NHK), a disease-causing α1-antitrypsin variant, by accelerating the formation of degradation-competent NHK monomers from disulphide-linked dimers58.Because of the diversity of this enzyme family and the diversity of potential substrates, many questions remain unanswered. 