Once completed, the appropriate hardware settings will be loaded and appear in the “M1/M2 DCC-100” pop-up window.Configuration settings will vary depending on the hardware you have and its installment. In the hardware configuration for our system, Module 1 controls the TCSPC detectors and a shutter that allows light into the detectors, Module 2 controls the 405 and 445 nm pulsed lasers, and Module 3 controls the 488 and 561 nm pulsed lasers. The τD value of 3573.2 ps (note SPCM64 software deals in ps rather than ns) was used for all future analyses (described below) to fit a double-exponential decay function under possible FRET conditions in which the acceptor mVenus was present.Protocol note: FLIM analysis can be done on a smaller region of the field of view by dragging in the white crosshairs from the corners of the donor image in the left window. Repeat steps 1 and 2 from Donor lifetime measurements using SPCImage in donor alone conditionsIn the “Multiexpontial Decay” interface (bottom of screen, right of the decay curve) select “2” for “Components”. In the case of the 2-exponential fit being done in this section, the interface will display the percentage of the reporter engaged in FRET as a1[%], the short lifetime of the donor (due to FRET) as t1[ps], and the percentage of reporter not engaged in FRET as a2[%]. The long lifetime t2[ps] will read the value at which it was fixed (for us this was 3573.2).Repeat steps 9 – 12 from Donor lifetime measurements using SPCImage in donor alone conditions as necessary to acquire a sufficient amount of data for your needs. FLIM-FRET lifetime measurements for the cylinB1-Cdk1 reporters in this proof of principle are reported in Table III.Measuring FRET efficiency from FLIM-FRET data using SPCImageFRET efficiency can be calculated given the fluorescent lifetime of the donor fluorophore under both FRET and non-FRET conditions. Proof of concept 2 – Camui CaMKII sensor in human HEK293T cells Camui is a FRET biosensor for CaMKII activity (Takao et al , 2005). B.Establishing timing of Ca2+ release in HEK293T cells by addition of ionomycinCa2+ entry into the cell leads to CaMKII activation. We use ionomycin to induce Ca2+ release in HEK293T cells. In the system described in this chapter this would simply require changing the dichroic mirror and bandpass (BP) filters in the TCSPC module and a dichroic mirror in the confocal scanning microscope. 2) Both molecules must be within angstroms to nanometers distance to each other 2) Both molecules must be within angstroms to nanometers distance to each other The microscope described in this chapter is a commercially available “turn-key” system that is stable enough to be housed in a microscopy core facility. A parts list and estimated costs for a system with 4 pulsed lasers (405 nm, 445 nm, 488 nm, and 561 nm), accompanying filters and dichroic mirrors, and two TCSPC detectors is provided in Table I. The scan head has two laser input ports and three emission output ports. mitotic versus interphase) can be identified and centered in the field of view within ~3–5 seconds. The chapter will not detail the transfection protocol or general culturing of Drosophila S2 cells as we have detailed this elsewhere (Ye & Maresca, 2016). Table II shows fluorophores that exhibit single exponential decay, and thus are best-suited for use with FLIM-FRET. The “AUX Settings” GUI will appear to allow you to define the system settings such that the input into the scan head will be the pulsed laser and the proper dichroic mirror will be positioned in the light path to allow the appropriate emitted photons to reach the TCSPC detectors. At this point, be sure that the appropriate pulsed laser (ours was 445 nm set to 50 mHz) is turned on.Open SPCM64 and load settings from a template file supplied by the system installer or, if a return user, by loading a file from a prior experiment. 