Three of them responded to ADPβS or ADP by inhibition of the M-current. As indicated in the protocol used for these experiments (see legend to Fig. This effect was reversible and was accompanied by an increased input resistance as measured by the voltage responses to hyperpolarizing current injections, as expected (data not shown). Independent evidence is available to confirm the presence of P2Y1 receptors on pyramidal neurons, because it has been established recently by single-cell reverse transcription (RT)-PCR analysis on laser-dissected individual neurons that pyramidal cells in the young rat hippocampus strongly express the P2Y1 receptor mRNA (Rodrigues et al , 2005). We conclude, however, that the great majority of the P2Y1 receptors on pyramidal cells must be postsynaptic to afferent neurons, because of the following: (1) in analyses recently reported of rat hippocampal synaptosomes, the P2Y1 receptor protein is abundant and primarily segregates with postsynaptic density protein (Rodrigues et al , 2005); (2) P2Y1 receptor mRNA is clearly expressed in the pyramidal cells, as noted above, confirming that the protein originates within them; and (3) this likewise holds for the M-current channel KCNQ (Kv7) subunits, in which single-cell RT-PCR again showed that their mRNA is also well expressed in the pyramidal cells, and their protein is seen on their somatic membrane and dendrites (Shah et al , 2002) (see also Roche et al , 2002). It is reasonable to suppose that such concentrations could readily be achieved through breakdown of any released ATP by ectonucleotidases (Zimmermann and Braun, 1996). Neurons were superfused (20-25 ml/min) with an external modified Krebs' solution containing 120 mM NaCl, 3 mM KCl, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 2.5 mM CaCl2,10mM HEPES, 11.1 mM glucose, adjusted to pH 7.3 with NaOH, and 0.5 μM tetrodotoxin (TTX) when using voltage-clamp recording. They were washed (three times for 5 min) with PBS solution; a PBS-based blocking solution containing 5% normal goat serum and 0.1% Triton X-100 was then applied for 1 h. Then incubations at 4°C were performed in the culture dishes for 24 h with the primary antibodies; i.e., with goat anti-neurogranin antibody (1:100 dilution; Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA), or with mouse anti-neurofilament 200 (NF-200) (1:200 dilution; Sigma, St. Louis, MO) in the same blocking solution. The cultures were then washed with PBS (three times for 5 min), and the respective secondary antibody was applied in the blocking solution for 2 h at 25°C. The fluorescence ratio images were used to track changes in intracellular Ca2+ of the designated region of interest inside the cells. It also reduced the outward rectification of the I-V curve positive to ‒70 mV [an additional feature of M-current inhibition (Brown and Adams, 1980)] but had no significant effect on membrane currents negative to ‒70 mV (Fig. Neither ADP nor ADPβS produced any additional inward current in the presence of XE991, indicating that their effect was solely the result of M-current inhibition.The absence of any response to ADP or ADPβS in the presence of XE991 (Fig. 3) or at potentials negative to ‒70 mV (Fig. 