Esophageal SCC is the 4th most common cause of cancer death in China (7). Endoscopy with mucosal iodine staining combined with histopathology has proved useful in identifying high-risk populations and offers multiple opportunities for assessment and intervention. Selenomethionine had a protective effect in the subgroup with mild dysplasia, but the correlation was not significant (P = 0.08). Severe dysplasia is usually treated either by endoscopic mucosal resection or argon plasma coagulation, whereas mild or moderate dysplasia generally is not treated but monitored by routine endoscopy. Many of the known compounds have antioxidant and antiinflammatory activities and protect against cancer including ellagic acid (30), anthocyanins (31, 32), ascorbic acid (vitamin C; ref. Measurement of pS6 by Western blot has been used to assess the activity of mTOR (42). Therefore, mild and moderate dysplasia are excellent surrogate endpoint biomarkers for the assessment of candidate chemoprevention agents. COX-2 antibody was purchased from Cayman Chemical Company. The antibodies for nuclear factor kappa B-p65 (NFκB-p65), phospho-NFκB-p65 (pNFκB-p65), S6, and phospho-S6 (pS6) were obtained from Cell Signaling Technology. One biopsy sample was fixed in 10% neutral-buffered formalin for overnight, transferred to PBS, embedded in paraffin, and sectioned in 4-μm thickness for histologic evaluation. Evaluation of histologic gradeThe biopsy slides were stained with hematoxylin and eosin. The slides were independently reviewed by 3 gastrointestinal pathologists in a blinded fashion who were unaware of the participant’s history, the intervention group assignments, the time the specimens were collected and visual endoscopic findings. Protein concentration was measured using a DC Protein Assay Kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. During the end of incubation, the membrane was washed extensively with TTBS. The immunoreactive bands detected by Immun-star WesterC Kit (Bio-Rad Laboratories) were developed by Molecular Imager ChemiDoc XRS (Bio-Rad Laboratories) and bands quantity analyzed by Image Lab Software (version 2.0, Bio-Rad Laboratories). All statistical analysis was carried out using GraphPad Prism 5.0. There were 37 males and 38 females, and the average age of all participants was 57 years (range, 41–72 years). Esophageal dysplasia was categorized into 3 grades: mild dysplasia (less than 25% of the thickness of epithelium), moderate dysplasia (less than 50% of the thickness of epithelium), and severe dysplasia (more than 50% of the thickness of epithelium). 