We based our titration on the total number of looks, rather than the number of looks in a given trial type, to avoid training the monkeys to show a difference. Monkeys were required to reach criterion on each of three consecutive sessions with the visual barrier before each test session. The delay between baiting and access was decreased by 1 s if the monkeys scored 10 or fewer correct out of 24 on each of two consecutive days. Monkeys moved on to the main task if they performed at criterion level (21 out of 24 correct) with the 2-s delay for each of three consecutive days.Main taskThe main task was conducted as in Experiment 1 with the exception that the tray was already at the lowest height. On seen trials, the monkeys also terminated the majority of their trials appropriately (mean = 0.74). In addition, looking behavior delayed the retrieval of food, thereby incurring a temporal cost as well. The less knowledge subjects felt they had about the to-be-tested domain, the more they would study. The less knowledge subjects felt they had about the to-be-tested domain, the more they would study. The less knowledge subjects felt they had about the to-be-tested domain, the more they would study. MethodsSubjects and apparatusThe same subjects used previously were used again. MethodsSubjects and apparatusThe same subjects used previously were used again. Accordingly, we expected the monkeys to use the flaps upon first exposure. The primary dependent measure was whether the monkeys, like human subjects, sought more information when needed, but avoided doing so when more information was not needed. After looking on unseen trials, monkeys showed a nonsignificant trend toward being more accurate than expected by chance in selecting the correct tube (mean = 0.65; t4 = 2.68, P = 0.055; chance = 0.25). Future studies of memory awareness might benefit from manipulating the benefit of the food rather than the cost of looking, either through the number or quality of rewards or the hunger of the subject. Thus, positive evidence for memory awareness (some of which was reported here) should not be discounted due to the presence of unnecessary searches on some trials or under some conditions. Non-metacognitive accountsThe inference of memory awareness is valid only if capuchins base their search strategy on judgments about the contents of their own memory. Accordingly, we would expect capuchins to have an overall tendency to choose without looking. While this could suggest a search for more information (e.g., an exhaustive search), it could also suggest that, in capuchins, the reaching response is weak compared to the searching response under these testing conditions. First, the capuchins were initially more explorative and less willing to attend to the baiting. Looking on unseen trials resulted in high choice accuracy, first-looks on seen trials were most often to the correct tube, and the monkeys most often immediately stopped looking after seeing the food. Third, their searches were appropriate, continuing until the food was found and then stopping. Nonetheless, the positive results from Experiment 2 are consistent with the existence of memory awareness in capuchins. Similarly, one out of five orangutans was significantly more accurate on a foraging task when she chose to take the test than when she was forced to take it (Suda-King 2007). By contrast, evidence from non-primates suggests that memory awareness may not be universal among vertebrates. To determine when memory awareness evolved, it would be useful to study additional primate species, especially New World monkeys. On each trial, they could either seek more information by searching the four tubes or choose a tube without looking. Four tubes (2.5 cm diameter × 16.6 cm length) were affixed to a metal tray 9.5 cm apart (Fig. Each tube attached via a hinge near the front of the tray such that it could be pulled up like a lever, causing any food inside to roll out toward the monkey. The tray on which the tubes were mounted could be placed at one of five different heights. It was connected to a monitor on the side of the testing set-up so that the experimenter could view and score the monkeys’ looking behavior without staring directly down the tubes and possibly influencing looks or choices.Behavior scoringThe experimenter sat to the side of the apparatus and watched the closed circuit television monitor. Determining the extent to which nonhuman animals are aware of their knowledge will inform research into when and why memory awareness might have evolved and research into what aspects of cognition we share with other animals. On seen trials the opaque screen was raised prior to baiting, allowing the monkey to observe the baiting procedure through the transparent screen. 