Never, Sometimes, or Often.” Responses across the two scales were standardized on a scale of 0–1 so that each item contributes equally to a given scale. Families’ income-to-needs ratio (INR), calculated as the ratio of family income relative to the federal income standard, normed for family size where a ratio of 1 reflects the cutoff for living in poverty, was collected at each wave of data collection. Neighborhood poverty was calculated using data obtained from the 2012–2016 American Community Survey 5-year estimate and defined as the percent of all individuals living at or below the federal poverty line within youths’ wave 6 residential census tracts (U.S. Census Bureau, 2018). Given high correlations between predictors, each CVE spatial dynamic measure was analyzed separately with the exception of the pervasiveness models which tested for additive and interactive effects of home- and school-based CVE. Specifically, long-term chronicity significantly, positively predicted behavioral dysregulation (B = 0.07, SE = .02, p < .01, see Model 1). Direct violent victimization consistently, positively predicted all three outcomes with only slight variation in the predictive power of each parameter (Tables 4 and 5), such that higher levels of DVV were related to higher anxiety, behavioral dysregulation, and cognitive dysregulation. Moreover, while behavioral dysregulation was robustly related to CVE, cognitive dysregulation was not highlighting how self-regulatory abilities may be context-dependent. This perspective postulates that the three spatial dynamics of CVE (chronicity, pervasiveness, and spatial proximity) may be unique in how they affect individuals and communities (McCoy, 2013).Firstly, CVE may vary in chronicity, or the repeated experience of CVE across specific periods of time (i.e., lifetime vs. 1 year) in space (where it occurs). Proximity of CVE is often conceptualized by levels of personal victimization, which vary from direct victimization (i.e., most proximal exposure), to witnessing and to simply “knowing about” or “hearing about” violence (i.e., most distal exposure). Two cohorts of children (N = 602, 53.3% female) and caregivers were recruited from Head Start Centers located in seven of Chicago’s most disadvantaged neighborhoods. Children and families were assessed when children were in preschool (Wave 1, N = 602), kindergarten (Wave 2, N = 398), third (Wave 3, N = 505), fifth (Wave 4, N = 491), ninth/tenth (Wave 5, N = 469), and tenth/eleventh (Wave 6, N = 437) grades. MeasuresCommunity Violence ExposureCrime statistics were obtained from the Chicago Data Portal (Chicago Data Portal, 2019a, 2019b). MeasuresCommunity Violence ExposureCrime statistics were obtained from the Chicago Data Portal (Chicago Data Portal, 2019a, 2019b). The count of all geocoded violent crime in each spatial boundary was divided by the number of days during that time frame to capture the temporal elements of each CVE measure.In order to delineate the individual influence of home- and school-based CVE relative to their combined influence, spatial dynamic measures were calculated at the level of the school, the level of the home, and the combination of the two. Youth responded to 20 items that tapped stable, general levels of anxiety (α = .72). An example item states, “I worry about making mistakes… hardly ever, sometimes, or often.” Responses were scored on a Likert scale from 1 to 3. 