Small spiny secondary dendrites were also immunopositive, but large aspiny primary dendrites were only weakly stained. Numerous puncta surrounded unstained somata of pyramidal neurons, especially in layers II/III and V (Fig. At high magnification, pyramidal cell somata were covered by a thin layer of PMCA2-positive/PMCA2a-negative staining, likely representing PMCA2b at the somatic plasma membrane (inset in Fig. We concluded that PMCA2a concentrated in a subpopulation of inhibitory axon terminals, but not in excitatory terminals. Neuronal somata were immunonegative for PMCA2a, but numerous puncta were double-labeled for PMCA2a and GABA; these could be seen surrounding both GABA-positive and GABA-negative somata (Fig. In epithelial cells the A-splice-site insert regulates PMCA2 targeting to the apical membrane (Chicka and Strehler, 2003). Beyond their distinctive content of calcium buffers, it was recently shown that GABA release from FS basket cells is mediated exclusively by P/Q-type VDCCs, whereas GABA release from CCK-positive basket cells is mediated exclusively by N-type VDCC (Hefft and Jonas, 2005). This antibody recognizes a single band of Mr ≈60,000 on immunoblots of synaptic membrane fractions from rat cerebral cortex. It shows positive binding with GABA, and GABA-KLH in a dot blot assay, and negative binding with bovine serum albumin (BSA) (manufacturer's technical information).For parvalbumin, a monoclonal anti-parvalbumin antibody (Sigma, PARV-19, P-3088) was used. Twelve male Sprague–Dawley rats (200–350 g, Charles River, Raleigh, NC) were used for this study. Single labelingFree-floating sections were permeabilized with 50% ethanol for 30 minutes and then treated for 30 minutes with 3% H2O2 in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS, 0.1 M, pH 7.4). After pre-incubation in 10% normal donkey serum (NDS, to block secondary antibody binding sites), sections were incubated in primary antibody overnight on a shaker at room temperature. We used the primary antibodies at a concentration so low that antigen consistently failed to be revealed by a conventional fluorophore-conjugated secondary antibody (donkey antirabbit IgG conjugated to FITC; 1:200 for 3 hours, Jackson), but was still clearly detectable with TSA. Immunoreacted tissue was rinsed in PB, postfixed 1 hour in 1% osmium tetroxide, rinsed in PB, rinsed in 0.1 M maleate buffer (MB; pH 6), stained en bloc for 1 hour in 1% uranyl acetate in MB, rinsed, then dehydrated in a graded ethanol series followed by propylene oxide, infiltrated with a mixture of Epon and Spurr resins, embedded between two sheets of Aclar plastic supported by glass slides, and polymerized at 60°C for 36–48 hours. 