Under both reducing and non-reducing conditions, we obtained similar results for the molecular weights of Ryk. Transfection of cortical neurons with Ryk siRNA prevented increased axon outgrowth in the presence of Wnt5a (Fig. Neurons were cultured for 2–3 days after transfection before the turning assays were carried out. Ryk but not Fz receptors are involved in Wnt5a evoked increases in cortical axon outgrowth whereas both Ryk and Fz receptors mediate repulsive cortical axon guidance induced by Wnt5a. In the example shown in Fig. However axon outgrowth involves calcium release through IP3 receptors as well as calcium influx through TRP channels whereas growth cone repulsion is mediated by TRP channels but not IP3 receptors. TRP channels have also been shown to be important for calcium signaling during growth cone guidance and axon outgrowth (Li et al , 2005; Shim et al , 2005; Wang and Poo, 2005). This treatment also partially attenuated calcium activity in 4/6 experiments, reducing the frequency of calcium transients from 9.0/hr to 0.8/hr after the addition of SKF96365 (Fig. Thus, as has been shown for other guidance cues such as netrin-1 and BDNF (Gomez and Zheng, 2006), calcium signaling is required for both of these Wnt induced behaviors. These results suggest that the calcium signaling mechanisms underlying axon outgrowth are similar during short term (1 hour) and long term (3 day) exposure to Wnt5a. In this study we found that in response to Wnt5a axon outgrowth is dependent on activation of Ryk receptors whereas growth cone repulsion requires both Ryk and Fz. Ryk, in response to Wnt5a, mediates repulsion of cortical axons (Liu et al , 2005; Keeble et al , 2006) which is consistent with our findings. In someexperiments, etched coverslips (Bellco) were used to locate neurons. Moreover, pharmacologically inhibiting PLC which is known to act upstream of IP3, eliminates the growth promoting effects of Wnt5a whereas a PLC agonist mimicked the effects of Wnt5a, confirming that 2-APB blocks the IP3 pathway. One possibility is that promotion of cortical axon outgrowth occurs through calcium influx via a TRP channel other than TRPC5. Wnt proteins are highly conserved secreted morphogens that play important roles during embryogenesis (Ciani and Salinas, 2005). The pseudocolored calibration bar indicates ratiometric intensity ranging from 100% of baseline calcium activity (black) to 175% (white). Scale bars in all figures=50μm. Data were saved in Excel 2000(Microsoft) and GraphPad Prism (GraphPad) was used to perform statistical analysis and create graphs. In experiments comparing 2 treatments and in turning assays the Mann-Whitney test was used for statistical analysis. Phase images of live cells were acquired with the Nikon microscope at 1 min intervals to record growth cone behaviors. Blots blocked with 3% milk (Lab Scientific) and 3% BSA were incubated with rabbit anti-mouse Ryk antibody (1:500) and goat anti-rabbit-HRP (1:10000, Jackson ImmunoResearch) to stain Ryk receptors. Antibodies were then stripped by re-blot plus mild solution (Millipore) and reprobed with mouse anti-βIII tubulin antibody (1:500) and goat anti-mouse-HRP (1:10000, Jackson ImmunoResearch) to stain the loading control, βIII tubulin. To minimize the effects of any morphological changes that could affect fluorescence measurements through changes in volume, the baseline (F0) was calculated as a shifting average of the fluorescence intensity over a 5-min window. Fluorescence images of Calcein Red/Orange were acquired immediately after each frame of Fluo-4 fluorescence. Ratiometric measurements (R) were obtained by dividing the Fluo-4 fluorescence value by the fluorescence value of Calcein Red/Orange. Calcium signals (R/R0) were then measured as the percentage change from a shifting average baseline (R0) of the ratiometric measurements as described above for nonratiometric measurements. The establishment of gradients with these techniques was confirmed with fluorescent dyes (data not shown). 