Chronic agomelatine administration promotes brain-derived neurotrophic factor expression, leading to a net increase in hippocampal neurogenesis in rodents (92, 104). In contrast, melatonin-rich blood collected at night inhibits human breast cancer growth, which is blocked by a melatonin receptor antagonist (S20928) (140), suggesting nocturnal endogenous serum melatonin inhibits breast cancer growth by receptor-mediated mechanisms. The MT1 receptor mRNA expression level varies among different breast cancer cell lines and primary breast tumors and is modulated by exogenous estrogen and melatonin treatment (143). Therefore, melatonin receptor antagonists may promote increased learning and memory and may thus be useful in ameliorating the symptoms of dementia, particularly Alzheimer’s disease. The MT1 melatonin receptor mediates the oncostatic effect of melatonin in breast and prostate cancer models. Formation of MT1/MT2 heterodimers is 3- to 4-fold lower than the formation of MT1/MT1 homodimers and is similar to the formation of MT2/MT2 homodimers (32) (Figure 2). Endogenous melatonin released from the pineal gland at night may feedback onto the SCN and activate MT1 and MT2 receptors to phase shift local and overt circadian rhythms (Figure 1). This review thus focuses on the actions of exogenous melatonin and melatonin drugs on functional melatonin receptors associated with therapeutic effects, specifically those affecting the central nervous system and cancer (Figure 1). The only exception is agomelatine, which shows high affinity for MT1 and MT2 melatonin receptors but is also an antagonist at the 5-HT2C serotonin receptor, a property believed to contribute to its antidepressant effects (for a review, see Reference 37). These two distinct effects of melatonin (i.e., sleep promotion and phase shift of circadian rhythms) resulting from actions at melatonin receptors in the central nervous system are reviewed below in relation to the therapeutic targets of marketed melatonin drugs (Table 1).Insomnia, or sleep-wake disorder, is defined as difficulty initiating and/or maintaining sleep or as nonrestorative sleep and is generally associated with daytime impairment or distress. Emphasis is placed on drugs currently on the market targeting MT1 and MT2 melatonin receptors for the treatment of insomnia, circadian sleep disorders, major depression, and cancer (Table 1). Melatonin receptor activation decreases neuronal firing through activation of the MT1 receptor in the SCN and areas of the limbic system, which may mediate the sleep-promoting properties of melatonin (9, 14).Activation of melatonin receptors in the SCN plays a pivotal role in coordinating the phase and amplitude of circadian rhythms throughout the body (60). The clinical use of Circadin is not associated with memory impairment or decreased vigilance and has no significant withdrawal symptoms (56).Ramelteon, a high-affinity MT1 and MT2 melatonin receptor agonist (42), promotes sleep in various mammalian species, including humans, without causing learning, memory, or motor function impairment or inducing reward (69, 70). In summary, tasimelteon modulates sleep and circadian rhythms, providing a highly effective treatment for a range of symptoms associated with transmeridian air travel, shift work, and other circadian-rhythm sleep disorders, including those observed in blind people.The melatonin agonists noted above (Table 1) are nonselective at the MT1 and MT2 melatonin receptor ligands. Furthermore, the selective MT2 agonist IIK7 produced similar effects on the latency and amount of NREM (76), suggesting that the MT2 melatonin receptor mediates some of the effects of melatonin agonists on sleep architecture. Additionally, long-term use leads to unwanted side effects such as sexual dysfunction, weight gain, and a cluster of cognitive, autonomic, and motor signs that constitute the serotonin syndrome (79, 80). 