[6] This data represented over eight states and 20,000 individuals with SCD. [24] Overcrowding also contributes to longer delays to analgesia and remains a challenge to the administration of timely analgesics. [32] While challenging, ED’s can form a multidisciplinary team to determine other “spaces” that can be used to initiate treatment in the ED. This supports prior work in which patients report feeling a high degree of stigma and being treated as a drug addict by healthcare providers. [32] There is no data to support a high incidence of addiction among individuals with SCD. In addition to being unable to make appointments, the lack of transportation to appointments has been previously identified as a barrier to follow-up. Case managers can help facilitate these needs as well. In NC, a partnership between EDs and the state Case Management System was formed. Over 3.5 years, over 900 referrals were made and a large shift from inactive to active case management was achieved. We believe are findings under-report barriers and over-report satisfaction because NC has a strong organized system of sickle cell care with six centers throughout the state. Several of these strategies have been in place for several years, yet patients continue to report dissatisfaction with long wait times for analgesics and provider knowledge gaps. Using a multi-method approach of survey and interviews, provided a robust understanding of persistent barriers to care and to identify opportunities to improve VOE care in the ED. The study took place in a large comprehensive Sickle Cell center in North Carolina (NC). [25] There were 27 questions from the Adult Sickle Cell Quality of Life Measurement Information System (ASCQ-Me) quality of care module included. [25] There were 27 questions from the Adult Sickle Cell Quality of Life Measurement Information System (ASCQ-Me) quality of care module included. [25] There were 27 questions from the Adult Sickle Cell Quality of Life Measurement Information System (ASCQ-Me) quality of care module included. [26–28] ASCQ-Me is composed of three composites: 1) access to care, 2) quality of provider communication and 3) quality of care in the ED. We utilized a semi-structured guide developed by members of the SCDIC needs assessment committee. A codebook was developed based on emerging themes from the transcripts and a priori codes adapted from literature on SCD. The remainder of the transcripts were coded using the final agreed upon coding structure. Treatment DelaysDelays in treatment initiation and assessment were a prominent concern in the interviews. 