Consequently, selective (radio)fluorination of electron-rich arenes with CsF/KF and [18F]TBAF is obtained under mild conditions. Despite these successes, the application of deoxyfluorination methods to radiofluorination is still limited by high reaction temperatures and an activated uronium nucleofuge that is prone to hydrolysis with electron-rich phenols.9,20 With these challenges in mind, we sought to develop a strategy that would allow for site-selective arene deoxyfluorination on electron neutral to electron-rich (hetero)aromatics under mild conditions. This solution was azeotropically dried with MeCN (1 mL × 3) under a stream of Argon at 100 °C and then placed under vacuum for 3 min. DCE (300 μL), anhydrous MeCN (45–65 μL), t-BuOH(400 μL) and 25 μL of TBAHCO3 in MeCN solution (~60 mg/mL) were sequentially added to the V-vial. The resulting solution was diluted and evenly mixed with MeCN (500 μL). The fraction corresponding to radiolabeled product was collected and the activity was measured (this activity was denoted by β) and the time was recorded. The decay-corrected radiochemical yield (RCY) was obtained by dividing the decay-corrected β by α. At the outset, it was determined that 427 nm LEDs were interchangeable with 455 nm LEDs (See Supplementary Table 1), and most of the optimization was performed with 455 nm LEDs due to their higher commercial availability. We hypothesize that the excess TBAHCO3 helps to minimize the decomposition of [18F]TBAF via Hofmann elimination and buffers the system to a basic pH, which has been shown to improve [18F]fluoride nucleophilicity.36 In the absence of TBAHCO3, a significant drop in yield was observed (entry 2). Since [18F]TBAF is usually synthesized with minimal H2O present,4 our results suggest that t-BuOH is forming beneficial adducts with [18F]TBAF30 and that excessive water mitigates 18F− nucleophilicity, which mirrors the drop in 19F-deoxyfluorination when H2O concentration increases. Thus, we were surprised to see that significant product formation (62.7% RCY) occurs after only 2 minutes and displays yield growth until 20 min (Extended Data Figure 1). Nucleofuge scope for deoxyradiofluorination beyond 4-chlorophenoxy ethers.While the 4-chlorophenoxy group is the optimal nucleofuge for our system, it is important to note that other electron-poor aryloxy groups explored earlier are also compatible with our radiofluorination method (Figure 5). A greater range of compatible carbonate and thiocarbonate leaving groups all provided [18F]2 in moderate to good RCY (24.1% to 57.1% RCYs). Substrate scope for CRA-SNAr with 18F.While the success of our 19F−-fluorination method appears to be substrate-dependent, greater generality is observed for radiofluorination (Figure 6) as the 18F-labeled congeners are isolated with moderate to excellent RCY. This result is complementary to existing routes involving spirocylic hypervalent iodoniums40 or stoichiometric aryl nickel complexes34, and enables facile production of [18F]35–1. 