Wild-type fibroblast cultures exhibited a consistent level of intercellular coupling (Figure 4C, left and 4D) despite a lack of distinct Cx43 staining at appositional membranes, indicating that intercellular communication between cardiac fibroblasts takes place through gap junctions that are smaller than and not as readily detectable as their myocyte counterparts. Two hours of AdVCx43 infection at an MOI of 100 resulted in an ~60% increase in Cx43 over control values (Figure 5). Additional studies will be required to establish the extent and functional role of heterocellular coupling in normal and diseased hearts, and whether there are differences in species ranging from mice to man. The TSA procedure requires three major steps: (1) incorporation of horseradish peroxidase (HRP), (2) treatment with Biotinyl Tyramide Amplification Reagent (NEN), and (3) visualization with fluorophore-conjugated streptavidin as follows. For DDR2 staining, biotinylated donkey anti-goat secondary antibody (1:200, Jackson) was used, followed by streptavidin with HRP (1:300, NEN) (step 1). For α-SMA staining, as stated above, the primary antibody contained HRP (step 1). For Cx43 staining, EnVision™+ anti-mouse with HRP secondary antibody (neat, Dako) was used (step 1). Subsequently, slides were incubated in Biotinyl Tyramide Amplification Reagent (1:300, NEN) for 10 min (step 2), followed by Cy2- or Cy3-conjugated streptavidin (1:500, Jackson) for 30 min (step 3) and Hoechst nuclear stain (1:10,000, Cambrex Bioscience, Walkersville, MD) for 10 min for fluorescence visualization.For cadherin staining, mouse anti-pan-cadherin (1:300, Sigma) followed by Cy3-conjugated goat anti-mouse secondary antibody (1:200, Jackson) was used.Immunofluorescence images were photographed using an AxioCam digital camera attached to an Olympus BX60 microscope. Thus, fibroblasts may influence cardiac function not only by extracellular matrix remodeling [Eghbali et al 1989; Cleutjens et al  1994], but also by modulating active and passive electrical properties, and thereby influencing (slowing) impulse propagation. Protein bands were visualized using Western Lightning Chemiluminescence Reagent Plus (Perkin Elmer LAS, Boston, MA). Immunoblots were quantified by densitometric analysis using Adobe Photoshop.In some experiments, cell extracts were incubated in the presence (0.1 U/μg protein) or absence of alkaline phosphatase (Roche) at 37°C in a shaking water bath for 3 hr. After incubation for 2 min at 37°C, the monolayers were rinsed three times with PBS, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde, mounted, and photographed using a fluorescence microscope and Nikon Coolpix 995 camera. Statistical AnalysisAll values are expressed as mean ± S.D. We used the protein bands (40–45 kD) in the dried gel to normalize the connexin protein values obtained in Figure 2. Cx45 expression was not significantly different (p = 0.205) between the two cell types. Fibroblasts express Cx43 detected on immunoblots as protein bands at 41–46 kD. 