Interestingly, there was no difference in the recurrence rates between the two cohorts. The protocol was approved by a central Institutional Review Board (IRB) and the IRB at each participating institution. At the time this study was performed, adjuvant chemotherapy was not the standard of care. This is a limitation of the study and potentially may have contributed to the lack of difference between the two arms of the trial. This study was conducted by many surgeons, all ABTS (or equivalent) certified and in many institutions (both community and academic), hence the results are generalizable and are not limited to a few specialized surgeons or centers. The surgeon had the option of sampling by mediastinoscopy (2R/L, 4R/L and 7), thoracotomy or Video Assisted Thoracic Surgery (VATS). An additional comparison of local, regional, and distant recurrence was performed using a cumulative incidence approach. This methodology was used to account for competing risks when determining recurrence rates as only first sites of recurrence were recorded. All participating surgeons were general thoracic surgeons and diplomats of the American Board of Thoracic Surgery (ABTS) or equivalent. All participating surgeons were general thoracic surgeons and diplomats of the American Board of Thoracic Surgery (ABTS) or equivalent. All analyses were performed on the 1023 (498 MLNS and 525 MLND) eligible subjects and additional intent-to-treat analyses were performed on all randomized subjects. An additional analysis was performed separately for T1 (p=0.83) and T2 (p=0.63) tumors and no differences were observed in DFS between treatment arms, see table 3. There was no difference between local (p=0.52), regional recurrence (p=0.10) or distant recurrence (p=0.76) between the two treatment arms. Similar results were observed for all randomized subjects (p=0.54, p=0.24, and p=0.77 for local, regional, and distant recurrence, respectively). After Evarts A. Graham's first successful pneumonectomy, surgical resection for lung cancer became popular in the United States. Although Davies in 1912 reported an anatomic lobectomy for lung cancer pneumonectomy remained the mainstay of therapy until it was challenged by Johnson8 and subsequently in a 1962 report by Shimkin9 lobectomy was shown to be acceptable therapy. 