face-name pairs and were consequently included in both subgroup analyses. The results are shown in supplementary Table S1. The results are shown in supplementary Table S1. The results are shown in supplementary Table S1. Previous functional neuroimaging research on memory encoding and episodic retrieval in MCI reported attenuated hippocampal activation in line with findings in AD (Hanseeuw et al  2011; Hampstead et al  2011; Jin et al  2012). The fusiform gyrus is anatomically and functionally adjacent to the hippocampus and has been highlighted during face recognition (McCarthy et al  1996; Lim et al  2011) and colour processing (Wang et al  2013). In addition to the above-mentioned histopathological findings in the hippocampus in AD, the CA1 region has shown decreased metabolic responses (Salehi and Swaab 1999). Less deactivation or stronger activation during demanding encoding tasks compared to undemanding tasks in the precuneus has been suggested as prognostic for the development of AD in at-risk stages such as MCI (Petrella et al  2007). It is further believed to play an active role in language processing (McCarthy et al  1993; Price 2000; Kurth et al  2010), whilst its function was more recently described as a very basic planning of general orofacial functions independent of actual words (Price 2010). MCI patients showed impaired verbal memory performance (Giovanello et al  2012) and activation likelihood in the afore-mentioned cluster was correlated with the lowest MMSE scores during retrieval of verbal stimuli. Based on this criterion, we rejected three retrieval experiments which had only one or two stimuli per condition (Gould et al  2005; Peters et al  2009; Bokde et al  2010).Direct comparison of study population and a group of age-matched controls.Stereotactic whole-brain coordinates were reported in a standardised reference space [Talairach or Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI) space] for the location of activation differences between MCI or AD, respectively, and controls.Independent study samples without overlapStudies solely focusing on drug effects were excluded.We contacted authors for missing data if the publications were otherwise suitable for our meta-analysis. Finally, Pariente et al  (2005) directly compared the encoding or recognition phases of AD patients to controls without subtracting any referential conditions before.To guarantee comparability of MCI and AD studies in the respective contrasts (encoding, retrieval), we statistically compared mean age and MMSE scores. Larger sample sizes are believed to provide data closer to the real value, and the belonging Gaussian distribution is thus smaller (Eickhoff et al  2009). noise), ALE scores were compared to an analytically derived null-distribution reflecting a random spatial association between experiments (Eickhoff et al  2012). The Anatomy Toolbox provides maximum probability maps, which represent a summary of different histological maps and allows attribution of each voxel of the reference space to the most likely cytoarchitectonic area (Eickhoff et al  2005). Assuming MCI to be part of the continuum from healthy ageing to AD (Buckner et al  2005), we searched for convergent clusters within MCI and AD patients compared to controls by generating encoding and retrieval maps for the MCI and AD groups pooled together for the published contrasts [‘MCI > Controls’ AND ‘AD > Controls’] and [‘Controls > MCI’ AND ‘Controls > AD], further referred to as “MCI + AD > Controls” and “Controls > MCI + AD”, respectively. 