A preliminary analysis of children (Age less than 18 years old; n = 13; subjects = 480; foci = 121) is provided in supplemental material (Supplementary Figure 3 and Supplementary Table 3). Specifically, bilateral ventromedial prefrontal cortex extending towards the subgenual portion of the pregenual ACC, left superior frontal gyrus, and bilaterally in the PCC. 3.6.Cognitive terms associated activationTo provide valid reverse inference into the cognitive processes associated with the meta-analytic map for Cyberball, we performed functional decoding of the ALE results from the full sample. In their seminal study, Eisenberger et al  (2003) used a Cyberball task to investigate the neural response to social exclusion. The top 20 Neurosynth cognitive terms with the highest correlation values are listed in Supplementary Table 10 and visualized as a word cloud in Fig. The meta-analysis results for the full sample indicate that several brain regions distributed broadly along the medial and lateral prefrontal cortices are consistently activated during Cyberball. We also identified three additional clusters—one in the right posterior insula, a second in the right superior frontal gyrus, and a third in bilateral inferior frontal gyrus. The resulting meta-analytic functional connectivity map largely overlapped with regions of the default network (encompassing the medial prefrontal cortex, superior frontal gyrus, PCC, inferior parietal lobule, and hippocampus) and the orbitofrontal cortex, an extended region of the default network (Uddin, Yeo, Spreng, 2019). Furthermore, our findings parallel results from seed-based connectivity showing increased connectivity between the vACC and default network brain regions during social exclusion (Bolling et al , 2011a). One possibility for the lack of dACC engagement might be due to the task. One possibility for the lack of dACC engagement might be due to the task. Similar findings have also been observed during third person (Beeney et al , 2011; Meyer et al , 2013) or recollected experiences of social exclusion (Kross et al , 2011). 2.1Literature search and study selectionWe performed a systematic review of functional magnetic resonance imaging studies investigating the neural correlates of social exclusion using Cyberball. 2.2.Coordinate based meta-analysis2.2.1.Activation likelihood estimation (ALE) analysisA coordinate-base meta-analysis of fMRI studies using Cyberball was conducted with the revised version of the ALE algorithm (Eickhoff et al , 2009, 2012). Significant clusters using the more conservative threshold were then used as seeds to perform a region-to-whole-brain co-activation meta-analysis (MACM; Eickhoff et al , 2011; Laird et al , 2009).2.2.2.AnalysisFive meta-analyses were performed using GingerALE: (1) full sample (53 studies, 1,817 participants); (2) traditional Cyberball design (29 studies, 1,021 participants); (3) adult samples (33 studies, 1,094 participants); (4) alternating Cyberball design (17 studies; 565 participants); and (5) studies reporting statistically significant increased self-reported distress after exclusion (20 studies; 632 participants). Sleuth (version 3.0.4, www.brainmap.org/sleuth) was used to search the BrainMap database for foci within each ALE cluster mask. The brain activation patterns and peak signal coordinates in the database are paired with associated cognitive terms (Yarkoni et al , 2011; https://neurosynth.org). The Neurosynth decoder function is an integrated feature within NeuroVault, and was used it to compute a voxel-wise Pearson correlation coefficient between our ALE map each of the term-based z-statistics maps extracted from Neurosynth. 