Younger age and parental drinking problems were positively associated with hazardous drinking.In Model 2 (Table 2) we added the number of types of lifetime victimization. Victimization experienced only in childhood was not associated with higher odds of hazardous drinking (OR=1.01; CI=0.75-1.36) Consistent with findings from national probability samples, women in the current study who identified as bisexual reported the highest rates of nearly all of the victimization types and the highest mean number of different types of victimization (x̄= 2.22).2, 21 Rates of victimization and number of victimization types among mostly heterosexual women generally fell between those of exclusively heterosexual women and the other three sexual minority subgroups. Despite showing somewhat lower risk of lifetime victimization than the other three sexual minority subgroups, rates of hazardous drinking and depression among mostly heterosexual women were more in line with rates reported by lesbian and bisexual women than those reported by exclusively heterosexual women. We hypothesized that (1) SMW will report more types of lifetime victimization and will be more likely to report hazardous drinking and depression than exclusively heterosexual women; (2) greater number of types of victimization will be positively associated with both hazardous drinking and depression; and (3) SMW will remain at higher risk than exclusively heterosexual women for hazardous drinking and depression after controlling for number of types of lifetime victimization. Thus, our pooling of data from the CHLEW and NSHLEW is both a strength and a limitation of the study. Thus, our pooling of data from the CHLEW and NSHLEW is both a strength and a limitation of the study. However, both the CHLEW and NSHLEW used a well-validated questionnaire designed to be sensitive to women's (including SMW's) lives and experiences. As such, limitations related to inferences about causality and temporal order must be considered when interpreting results. Study samples and interviewsIn an effort to overcome the challenges of obtaining samples with sufficient numbers of sexual minority subgroup respondents, we pooled data from two studies conducted in 2001 that used similar study methods and interview questionnaires—a strategy recommended by the Institute of Medicine Committee on Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual and Transgender Health Issues and Research Gaps and Opportunities.35National Study of Health and Life Experiences of Women (NSHLEW)The NSHLEW is a 20-year longitudinal study of drinking and problem drinking that surveyed nationally representative samples of adult U.S. women every five years between 1981 and 2001.36 Statistical weighting adjusted for variations in non-response rates by sampling unit and by major demographic characteristics (age, ethnicity, education, and marital status) and for oversampling of heavier drinkers (4 or more drinks/week on average).In the 2001 NSHLEW survey, female interviewers from the National Opinion Research Center conducted face-to-face computer-assisted personal interviews in participants’ homes or other private settings. In addition, one participant identified as “queer” and another preferred not to be labeled; these two participants are not included in the analyses presented here.The CHLEW largely replicated the interview protocol used in the NSHLEW. We combined responses to four 12-month indicators of hazardous drinking: (1) heavy episodic drinking, (2) intoxication, (3) adverse drinking consequences and (4) symptoms of potential alcohol dependence. A similar question asked about frequency of subjective intoxication (“drinking enough to feel drunk—where drinking noticeably affected your thinking, talking, and behavior”). For example, NSHLEW participants who used descriptors such as “pushed me”, “grabbed me”, “hit me”, “beat me”’, “choked me”, and “kicked me” were coded as having experienced IPV. Number of victimization types.Exclusively heterosexual women (x̄=0.94) and mostly heterosexual women (x̄=1.23) reported a lower mean number of types of victimization experiences compared to bisexual (x̄=2.22), mostly lesbian (x̄=1.85), and exclusively lesbian (x̄=1.93) women.Overall, women in the study were more likely to report childhood victimization only (32.3%) than adult victimization only (8.6%); just under one-quarter (24.1%) reported revictimization (both childhood and adult victimization). 