Step 1 included the main effects of the covariates and Step 2 included the covariates with the interaction terms.Significant interaction terms and simple slopes were plotted using an automated spreadsheet (Dawson, 2014). Step 1 included the main effects of the study variables considered in the previous regressions. The CD PRS × community disadvantage interaction was associated with marijuana use disorders (Figure 1); however, the CD PRS × parental monitoring interaction was not (see Figure 2 in the supplementary materials). When exposed to higher community disadvantage, males with a higher CD PRS exhibited a greater log odds for a marijuana use disorder (B =.64, p =.017). This may be especially true in young adulthood, given that this developmental period is associated with increased independence and decreases in oversight by parents (Arnett, 2007). CD, ADHD, and marijuana use disorders may be a part of a larger externalizing syndrome, which is supported by work indicating strong, positive correlations between these conditions (Carragher et al , 2014; Harty et al , 2015; Korhonen et al , 2012; Krueger et al  2005; Miles et al , 2002). Whereas evidence of G x E interactions was found, the main effects of the CD and ADHD PRS on marijuana use disorders were not significant. In total, eight sets of analyses were run. Moreover, there are several limitations of the current study to acknowledge. An advantage of the molecular genetic approach is that such knowledge may shed light on neurobiological mechanisms underlying phenotypes. The consideration of polygenic influences that are associated with marijuana use disorders is consistent with substantial evidence that numerous genetic variants associated with psychiatric outcomes (i.e., CD and ADHD) likely influence liability for substance use problems (Hines et al , 2014). First, we examined whether externalizing disorders PRS (i.e., CD and ADHD) were associated with marijuana abuse and dependence among young adults. Three-thousand and one-hundred and nine individuals were available for recruitment in first grade. Participant demographic information for the analytic sample is outlined in Table 1.With respect to differences in first grade demographic characteristics between the analytic sample and those African Americans not assessed at age 20 and/or those who did not provide DNA, the only significant difference (p ≤ .05) was that the analytic sample had a significantly greater proportion of females than the whole sample. The items used to create the index include the percentages of (a) adults 25 years or older with a college degree, (b) owner-occupied housing, (c) households with incomes below the federal poverty threshold, and (d) female-headed households with children. The participants included in the GWA met diagnostic criteria for alcohol dependence. This process uses an orthogonal transformation to reduce the multi-dimensional genome-wide SNP data into a smaller number of principal components. We used all the available measured SNPs (roughly 900,000) to generate these components. The z-scored residuals from these regressions are the continuous ancestry-adjusted (or corrected) scores we used in the primary analyses. 