A Flag-tagged mouse Sox7 was cloned into pTRE2 and transfected into Tet-inducible C4-2 cells. The Sox7 gene encodes a transcription factor that can both enhance and inhibit transcription (21). Emerging evidence indicates that other proteins, such as the SFRPs which inhibit the WNT receptor, are also capable of attenuating WNT signaling even in the presence of down-stream mutations (41). Despite these advances in understanding the relationship between catenin, WNT signaling, and tumor growth, our current understanding of β-catenin regulation remained limited to the existence of control via the cytoplasmic destruction complex, even though Zorn et al  had demonstrated back in 1999 that β-catenin function could be inhibited by Sox17, at least in Xenopus (40). Therefore, it is our conclusion that the Sox7 gene most likely encodes a candidate tumor suppressor that plays an important role in suppressing various cancers, and one of Sox7 functions is to serve as an independent checkpoint for β-catenin transcriptional activity. Rabbit polyclonal anti-b-catenin antibody (cat#9587) was purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Danvers, MICROARRAY), and anti-Active-β-catenin (anti-ABC, clone 8E7) antibody was purchased form Millipore. This total RNA was reverse transcribed to cDNA, and qPCR was carried out in a 20-µl volume using iQ SYBR green supermix (Bio-Rad, cat# 170-8882) on a Bio-Rad iCycler. Allelic imbalance analysisTissue specimens were manually microdissected, then the tumor DNA was isolated from tissue samples as previously described (20). First, the normal DNA samples were genotyped for chromosome 8p (ch8p) heterozygosity using nine bi-allelic single-nucleotide polymorphic markers (SNPs) on chromosome 8p, to select for an informative marker for subsequent allelic imbalance analysis. Antibodies against active β-catenin, β-catenin, FLAG and actin were used for immunoblot analysis. The stability of β-catenin is regulated by a multi-component cytoplasmic destruction complex containing APC, axin and glycogen synthase kinase 3 β (GSK3β) (2). Of the remaining 18 tumors, eleven (61%) tumors contained allelic loss in at least one SNP marker in this region. In colorectal cancers, mutational inactivations of the APC/axin genes or mutational activations of the β-catenin gene disrupt the interaction between β-catenin and this cytoplasmic destruction complex, leading to the stabilization of β-catenin in the nucleus (1). A Sox7 mutant construct that only retained the DxxEF structure (Figure 4A, Sox7-M, DRNEFGGG) was still capable of binding to β-catenin (Figure 4C, lane 3), implying that the glutamic acid (E) and phenylalanine (F) within this motif might play significant roles in the binding process.We also evaluated whether Sox7-Δ is still capable of suppression β-catenin-mediated CRT in H1299 cells. Unlike wild-type Sox7, increased dose of Sox7-Δ did not result in further CRT inhibition because of a significant increase in the transcription of pOF-Flash plasmid by Sox7-Δ (Figure 4B). 