This has been used previously to follow immature granules in PC12 cells (Rudolf et al , 2001). Following the bleaching of an area of the Golgi complex, fluorescence recovery of this ARF-1-EGFP occurred with a t1/2 of 44s and was almost complete (fractional recovery of 87.5%) within the recorded timeframe of the experiments (Fig 4A,E). Following the bleaching of an area of the Golgi complex, fluorescence recovery of this ARF-1-EGFP occurred with a t1/2 of 44s and was almost complete (fractional recovery of 87.5%) within the recorded timeframe of the experiments (Fig 4A,E). The recovery of EGFP-Rab3A was more similar to that of the ARF1-EGFP with extensive although not complete recovery with a t1/2 of 32s. It was also reported that geldanamycin could block neurotransmitter release from synaptosomes. In order to see whether there was a similar effect on the release of secretory granule contents from PC12 cells, we assayed ATP-stimulated release of exogenously-expressed human growth hormone (hGH) from PC12 cells pre-incubated for 1h prior to stimulation with varying concentrations of the inhibitor (see Fig. When membrane-associated, they may become GTP-bound through interaction with specific guanine nucleotide exchange factors (GEFs). At this time immature secretory granules in PC12 cells can under go regulated exocytosis (Tooze et al , 1991). Another interpretation is that separate mechanisms exist for Rab-extraction during rapid cycling, and Rab-extraction where a donor membrane compartment meets its target membrane. Under this interpretation the Hsp90-dependent mechanism would control only Rab-extraction at the target membrane. Removal of the Rab during cycling may involve the removal of the Rab alone, while removal of the Rab at the target membrane is likely to require the disassembly of Rab-containing complexes. The regulation and dynamics of Rab3A in neurones have been partially characterised but less is known about Rab27A. Individual Rab subtypes characteristically associate with specific membrane compartments, and interact with specific effector(s) to regulate trafficking between compartments (Pereira-Leal and Seabra, 2000). Importantly, recent work has established that Rab3A and Rab27A are likely to be the only two Rabs that function in regulated exocytosis in this cell type and that both contribute in a non-redundant manner to secretory granule exocytosis (Tsuboi and Fukuda, 2006). Secretory granules are distributed throughout the cytosol in PC12 cells and have an approximately 10-fold larger diameter than synaptic vesicles (Warashina, 1985; Willig et al , 2006). The rat Rab27A sequence was amplified from the PC12 cDNA by PCR and then inserted in frame into the pEGFP-C1, pECFP-C1 and pmRFP-C1 vectors to generate mammalian expression constructs for Rab27A, N-terminally tagged with EGFP, ECFP and mRFP. Transfection mixes consisting of 3μl of Lipofectamine 2000 reagent (Invitrogen, Paisley, UK) per μg plasmid in 100μl Optimem 1 media (Gibco) were prepared and incubated at room temperature for 20 min before being added dropwise to the cells. Coverslips were then washed twice in PBS, and exposed to primary antibody in PBS containing 0.3% BSA and 0.1% Triton-X-100 (PBT) for 1h. Confocal microscopyConfocal microscopy following immunocytochemistry was carried out on a Leica TCS-SP microscope (Leica Microsystems, Heidelberg, Germany) using a 63x oil immersion objective with a 1.4 numerical aperture and pinhole set to airy1. To determine the rate of fluorescence recovery, fluorescence in these regions was measured over time, and then normalised with respect to corresponding total cellular fluorescence at each individual time point to correct for bleaching during low power laser excitation. Each well was transfected with 0.5μg of the pXGH5 hGH-encoding vector either alone, or combined with other vectors as detailed in the text. It was not possible to carry out a similar experiment to determine the localisation of endogenous Rab27A because antibodies were not available. 