6H).Activated STATs bind to STAT consensus sequences in the promoters of target genes to increase their transcription, so we determined whether pSTAT3 might exert its effects on ICER expression by binding to a consensus site on the ICER promoter (ICER-p). 6, J and K), providing further evidence that the JAK/STAT pathway regulates ICER in vivo and identifying pSTAT3 as a mediator of ICER transcription in the brain.Finally, we asked whether the decrease in Gabra1 transcription after SE was reversed on inhibition of JAK/STAT signaling in vivo. We now elucidate the signaling pathways that regulate Gabra1, showing that increases in pCREB and ICER occurring after SE mediate the repression of Gabra1 transcription through CRE site binding, resulting in reduced expression of α1 mRNAs and a loss of α1γ2-containing GABAARs. Therefore, the final impact of global blockade of these pathways on epileptogenesis may be difficult to predict. All rats treated with full-dose pilocarpine were confirmed to have prolonged stage 5 behavioral seizures (79). Receptor immunoprecipitationCoimmunoprecipitation experiments were carried out with the use of the Pro-found mammalian coimmunoprecipitation kit (Pierce, Rockford, IL). Samples were centrifuged at 12,000g for 30 min at 4°C. Controls were performed by quenching the same gel before coupling antibodies to test for proteins that may bind nonspecifically to the gel. Furthermore, using primary cultured hippocampal neurons, we show that pCREB is required for the ICER-mediated decrease in GABRA1-p activity and that brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) activation of the Janus kinase (JAK)/signal transducers and activators of transcription (STAT) pathway is the endogenous signal that drives the process. Western blotWestern blot was performed with modifications of published protocols (80). Protein (25 μg) extracted from DG was loaded into 10% (for pCREB and pSTATs) or 12% (for CREM/ICER and pSTATs) SDS–polyacrylamide gels and run for 1.5 hours at 110 V. Blots were then transferred to nitrocellulose membranes and blocked in 2% milk/tris-buffered saline with Tween-20 (TBS-T) (for pCREB) or 5% milk/phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) (for CREM/ICER). The cell pellet was gently resus-pended in 500 μl buffer A [10 mM tris–Cl, pH 7.9, 10 mM KCl, 0.1 mM EDTA, 0.1 mM EGTA, 1 mM dithiothreitol (DTT), 1 mM PMSF, 1× Protease inhibitor cocktail] and incubated for 15 min, after which 25 μl of a 10% NP-40 solution (American Bioanalytical, Natick, MA) was added. The cell suspension was vortexed for 5 s and centrifuged at 12,000g for 30 s to pellet nuclei. The supernatant was removed and the nuclear pellet was resuspended in 400 μl of buffer C (20 mM tris–Cl, pH 7.9, 400 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM DTT, 1 mM PMSF, 1× Protease inhibitor cocktail) and incubated for 1 hour at 4°C. The nuclear extract buffer was changed to DNA pull-down buffer C (20 mM tris, pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, 50 mM NaCl) and then protein concentration was determined by the Bradford assay (Bio-Rad Laboratories). DNA pull-down assayThe DNA pull-down assay was performed as previously described (81). were washed three times in buffer A (5 mM tris, pH 8.0, 0.5 mM EDTA, 1 M NaCl). Annealed oligonucleotides were incubated with beads (200 μmol/mg of beads) for 15 min at room temperature in buffer A. Beads were then washed twice with 500 μl buffer A and three times with 500 μl buffer C (20 mM tris, pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 1 mM DTT, 50 mM NaCl). Cell culture and transfectionsPrimary rat hippocampal cultures were prepared from embryonic day 18 embryos (Charles River Laboratories) and transfected 6 to 8 days after dissociation with a modified calcium phosphate precipitation method (23). Primary cultured hippo-campal neurons were plated in six-well plates as described (21-23). After 15 min of incubation, complexes were directly added onto the cells and incubated for 24 hours under normal growth conditions. The transfection was repeated for another 24 hours. The promoter fragment confers full promoter activity on primary neocortical neurons. We immunoprecipitated the endogenous rat Gabra1–protein complex with antibodies directed against pCREB (Ser133) and detected precipitated Gabra1 genomic fragments by PCR. We therefore developed a DNA pull-down assay to purify nuclear proteins in DG tissue that specifically recognize the Gabra1:CRE so that these proteins could be identified by gel electrophoresis. 4, C and D), suggesting that BDNF-induced decreases in transcription of α1 may be mediated by an increase in ICER. 