Specifically, we performed rank aggregation across three lists of genes ranked by differential expression, differential enhancer methylation, and differential enhancer accessibility in order to identify genes that are repressed upon decreased distal regulatory potential and vice versa. More recently, NSD1 has been demonstrated to be a potential prognostic biomarker in HPV (−) HNSCC (Pan et al , 2019), suggesting that a distinct biological mechanism is involved during the evolution of NSD1 MT HNSCC. It is also possible that chromatin compaction due to H3K27me3 spread restricts acetylation or hinders acetyltransferases by direct competition for substrates. Our findings on epigenetic consequences of NSD1 mutations in HNSCCs complement recent advances in understanding the significance of H3K36me2 in cancer. Lhoumaud et al  (2019) investigated the function of NSD2—another member of the histone methyltransferase family that has been implicated in depositing intergenic H3K36me2—in multiple myeloma. Although the downstream epigenetic effects of NSD1 and NSD2 appear similar, mutations in those two methyltransferases are involved in distinct pathologies. A frequent NUP98-NSD1 translocation has been found in acute myeloid leukemia (Jaju et al , 2001), although most likely this fusion does not act through NSD1 overexpression but a gain-of-function phenotype of the resulting protein (Wang et al , 2007). We carried out an integrative gene set enrichment analysis, aiming to focus on the primary genes targeted by the regulatory cascade. Several pathways, including KRAS signaling, EMT, and inflammatory responses, were downregulated following the loss of NSD1 (Figure 5A). Further mechanistic studies are warranted, which will have significant translational implications for the future development of immune therapies for HNSCCs. Acid-extracted histones (5–10 μg) were resuspended in 100 mM ammonium bicarbonate (pH 8), derivatized using propionic anhydride and digested with trypsin as previously described (Sidoli et al , 2016). Samples were centrifugated and pellets resuspended in 500ul of nuclei lysis buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl pH 8.0, 10 mM EDTA, 1% (w/v) SDS, 50 mM NaF, 1 mM PMSF, 1 mM Phenylarsine Oxide, 5 mM Sodium Orthovanadate and EDTA-free protease inhibitor tablet) and incubated 30 minutes on ice. More recently, we provided evidence that NSD1 MT HNSCC samples are specifically characterized by low intergenic levels of H3K36me2 (Weinberg et al , 2019). Cell pellets are thawed on ice and resuspended in 85 to 100ul of 1x RIPA buffer from 10x (cell signaling #9806) and add 1:100 Proteinase inhibitors cocktail (P8340, Sigma) and 0.1mM of PMSF. Collect the supernatant to new tubes and proceed to quantification using BCA-Pierce Protein assay ThermoScientific/Pierce (23227) and use 96 cell microplate flat bottom with 25ul standards every time and 5ul protein samples. Per-base methylation calling was performed with MethylDackel v0.4.0 (https://github.com/dpryan79/MethylDackel) after excluding biased ends. Additionally, quantitative normalization entailed the multiplication of original signal (either in CPM or as log2 ratio over input) by the genome-wide modification percentage information obtained from mass spectrometry.Enrichment matrices for aggregate plots and heatmaps were generated through deepTools (Ramírez et al , 2016, 2018) v3.3.1 using bamCoverage/bamCompare (–skipZeroOverZero–centerReads–extendReads 200) followed by computeMatrix (scale-regions–regionBodyLength 20000–beforeRegionStartLength 20000–afterRegionStartLength 20000–binSize 1000). Motif density was calculated using HOMER (Heinz et al , 2010) v4.11 with annotatePeaks (-hist 5).WGBS analysisMethylation calls were binned into 10kb windows, with per-window beta values calculated as (# methylated reads in bin) / (total # of reads in bin). The relative similarity metric is finally defined as the average correlation to KO samples subtracted from those to WT. We targeted the SET [Su(-var)3–9, enhancer-of-zeste and trithorax] domain and PWWP (proline–tryptophan–tryptophan–proline) domain of NSD1 because these two domains play crucial roles in catalyzing the deposition of methyl groups to H3K36 (Herz et al , 2013) and reading the methylated lysines on histone H3 (Rona et al , 2016), respectively. The editing was confirmed by sequencing (MiSeq) of the regions surrounding the target sites (Figure S2A; Table S2), and the absence of the protein was confirmed by western blots of NSD1 (Figure S1C). This suggests that the presence of H3K36 methylation within actively transcribed genes is still sufficient to maintain DNAme in those regions. This suggests that the presence of H3K36 methylation within actively transcribed genes is still sufficient to maintain DNAme in those regions. We conclude that the reduction in enhancer activity has a dominant effect on the regulatory landscape of NSD1-KO cells, in comparison to the non-H3K36me2-associated increase in acetylation.To verify the dampening of cis-regulatory output as a primary outcome of H3K36me2 depletion, we took another orthogonal approach. Because most regulatory effects of intergenic epigenetic changes are constrained by chromatin conformation (Donaldson-Collier et al , 2019; Lhoumaud et al , 2019), especially topologically associating domains (TADs) that delimit the majority of promoter-enhancer long-range interactions, we specifically investigated how these domains impact H3K36me2 depletion’s influence. As an association could also arise due to simple linear—rather than spatial—proximity, we included the distance of genes to their nearest cluster B bin as a covariate together with the status of sharing a TAD in logistic regression modeling (Figure 4). Next, in order to exclude the possibility that we may not be appropriately accounting for the distance effect, the continuous distance variable was substituted with a categorical surrogate to signify whether or not a gene is within a critical distance of the nearest cluster B bin. Finally, in an alternative approach to control for the distance effect, we used resampling to create lists of genes that are equal in size to the set of downregulated genes and have the same distribution of distance to the nearest cluster B bin. 