SNCEE-treated Cdc25A migrated more rapidly than decomposed SNCEE-treated Cdc25A under non-reducing conditions (Figure 1C, lane 1 vs. lane 2); addition of β-mercaptoethanol to Cdc25A prior to SDS-PAGE ablated this enhanced migration (Figure 1C, lanes 3 and 4). Figure 1D shows that preaddition of DTT before the phosphatase assay restored the majority of Cdc25A activity attenuated by SNCEE. H2O2 also decreases Cdc25A expression in HeLa cells, although the mechanism remains unidentified (10). Stress-dependent global translational inhibition is mediated primarily through phosphorylation and inhibition of the translational regulator eIF2α (35). In response to various stresses, eIF2α is phosphorylated on Ser51 by stress-sensitive kinases (36). These modifications to Cdc25A could induce a migration shift by SDS-PAGE, would be reversible with DTT, and would be expected to inhibit its phosphatase activity if the catalytic cysteine were modified. Alternatively, generation of an intramolecular disulfide bond between the active site thiolate and a proximal thiol as reported for H2O2-treated Cdc25 could occur (8). Further studies will be necessary, however, to elucidate how low molecular mass RSNOs inhibit Cdc25A activity. Protein phosphatase PP5 activity is required for ATM activity (40), and PP5 is inhibited by okadaic acid (41). Figure S2B), indicating that this could be responsible for eIF2αSer51 hyperphosphorylation in response to RSNOs. Perturbations to the ER redox status either in response to reductants (44) or RNS are reported to initiate ER stress, and thus generate phospho-eIF2αSer51, presumably through activation of PERK (45). S-nitrosation is a reversible modification capable of altering protein function and cell signaling. Medium containing DNA-lipid complexes was aspirated three hours after transfection and replaced with complete growth medium. Fluorescence microscopyCells were washed once with PBS before addition of 4% formaldehyde in PBS for 10 minutes at ambient temperature. Cells were washed twice with PBS, and nuclei were stained with 1 μg/mL Hoechst 33342 in PBS. Cdc25A is overexpressed in numerous human cancers (4) and suppresses apoptosis by binding to and inhibiting ASK-1 (5). Cdc25A phosphatase activity was measured at pH 7.4 and at ambient temperature with the artificial substrate O-methylfluorescein phosphate (OMFP) at its Km in a 96-well microtiter plate assay based on previously described methods (22). Western blots and autoradiograms were representative of at least three independent experiments. S-Nitrosothiols inhibited Cdc25A phosphatase activityThe Cdc25A catalytic cysteine is predicted to have a low pKa and exist primarily as a highly reactive thiolate anion (8, 23). We incubated recombinant His-tagged Cdc25A with the low molecular mass RSNO SNCEE, and measured Cdc25A phosphatase activity with the artificial substrate OMFP. Together, these results indicate that low molecular mass RSNOs regulate the phosphatase activity of Cdc25A. 