For the behavioral experiments in which multiple factors were evaluated, ANOVA was used and significant interactions were deconstructed along the relevant factor to examine main effects and group differences followed up with t-tests. All other data analyses were performed in GraphPad Prism (Version 8.3.0). Notably, Hnrnph1 (the first protein-coding gene within the 114 kb congenic interval) was one of the top genes exhibiting differential exon usage (Table 3A), providing direct evidence at the exon level that one or more functional variants within Hnrnph1 regulates exon usage and ultimately underlies differences in MA behavior. It should also be noted that we did not identify a significant difference in gene expression or in exon usage of Rufy1 (the second protein-coding gene within the interval), thus limiting functional effects of D2J variants at the mRNA level to Hnrnph1 and further supporting the candidacy of Hnrnph1 as a quantitative trait gene underlying MA behavior (28).We previously showed that mice heterozygous for a 16-bp deletion within the first coding exon of Hnrnph1 (refer to as the H1+/− mice) were less sensitive to the stimulant, rewarding, and reinforcing properties of MA and showed a reduction in MA-induced dopamine release (28, 32). To directly compare the functional effects of inheriting the deletion versus the 114 kb congenic region on gene expression and exon usage, we identified 21 overlapping genes that were differentially expressed in the striatum between 114 kb congenic mice and H1+/− mice relative to their B6J wild-type littermates (Fig.4A), which was significantly greater than what would be expected by chance (Fisher’s exact test: p = 9.31E-23). With regard to Hnrnph1, a human candidate gene association study identified a functional intronic variant in OPRM1 (mRNA target of hnRNP H) that affected binding to hnRNP H to regulate splicing and was associated with the severity of heroin addiction (51). Psychostimulant use disorders (PUDs), including methamphetamine (MA) and cocaine dependence, are a serious public health concern in the United States. on Days 3, 4, and 5 and were video-recorded for distance traveled over 60 min using Anymaze (Stoelting Co., Wood Dale, IL, USA) as previously described (28). RNA samples were bioanalyzed (RIN > 8) and cDNA library was prepared using the Illumina TruSeq Standard mRNA LT (100 bp paired-end reads). One notable example was the identification of a genome-wide association between FAM53B and cocaine dependence in humans (4). One notable example was the identification of a genome-wide association between FAM53B and cocaine dependence in humans (4). This is one of the first examples demonstrating a direct correspondence between genome-wide genetic association, functional changes in gene expression, and trait-relevant behaviors (cocaine self-administration) between rodents and humans. 30 μg of protein was heated in a 70°C water bath for 10 min before loading into a 4 – 20% Criterion TGX precast Midi protein gel (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA; Cat# 5671094) for SDS-PAGE followed by wet transfer to a nitrocellulose membrane. The membrane was then blocked with 5% milk for 1 h and probed with primary antibodies. For quantification analysis of protein expression, total protein stains were used as loading controls in normalization for immunoblotting quantification (42, 43). Cells were split every 3 to 4 days and were grown at 37°C in an atmosphere of 5% CO2.For HEK293T, cells were seeded in 6-well plate at a density of 2.5 x 105 cells per well 24 hours prior to transfection and would be about 90% confluent at the time of transfection. The cells were co-transfected with 1 μg of the experimental firefly luciferase construct and 0.2 μg internal pRL control plasmid expressing Renilla luciferase driven by the CMV promoter (Promega, Madison, WI, USA; Cat# E2261). 24 hours after transfection, HEK293T cells were detached with 0.25% of Trypsin-EDTA (ThermoFisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA; Cat# 25200056) and counted and re-seeded at a density of 2.5 x 104 cells per well in 96-well plate. 