4.2.ChemFET preparationThe key feature of our HS− selective ChemFETs is the application of a hydrosulfide-selective polymer membrane, to the silicon nitride gate oxides of commercially available pH-sensitive FETs. ChemFETs often have chemically selective membranes comprised of PVC, PDMS, and occasionally NBR among other formulations [22,26–29]. Generally, the polymers alone have limited native sensitivity to ionic targets and their sensitivity/selectivity is be imparted by incorporating chemical recognition elements (CRE) into the polymer membranes to create the interfacial chemically selective material of the device.Tetraoctylammonium (TOA) was chosen as our CRE. NBR is also inert under the sample conditions and adheres to the gate oxide well enough to allow an operational lifetime of over 46 h. Potentiometric methods in particular have been poorly represented in environmental, petrochemical, and biological application spaces and provide an opportunity for continued development [12]. H2S has a pKa near 7 and is primarily present as its conjugate base, hydrosulfide (HS−), at physiological temperature and pH. The ChemFETs described in this work feature a polymer membrane formulated with a non-covalently associated HS− ionophore. They provide detection of HS− in real-time with selectivity over sulfur-containing compounds including cysteine and glutathione, which are common interferants in H2S measurements. 3, 59 mV represents the maximum possible change in Vcell for each decade change in the activity of an ionic species having a charge of +1 or −1. Due to the toxicity and environmental prevalence of H2S (from both natural and unnatural sources) further development of environmental H2S sensing methods is needed [2]. 3.4.Electrode surface characterizationElemental composition and surface morphology were determined by scanning electron microscopy energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (SEM-EDS) using a ThermoFisher Helios Hydra Plasma FIB. Additional elemental analysis was performed using Thermo Scientific ESCALAB 250 X-ray photoelectron spectrometry (XPS) system with an Al Kα monochromated source at 20 kV. 