Participants and parents/caregivers respond on a 5-point Likert scale ranging from “False” to “True.” Example items include “I say the first thing that comes to my mind without thinking enough about it,” “I should try harder to control myself when I’m having fun,” and “I become “wild and crazy” and do things other people might not like.” Reliability estimates range from α = .78 to 0.81. Given our cohorts were naturally occurring (e.g., age) we expected cohort differences to emerge as cohort 1 (14 year olds) are likely different in terms of binge drinking compared to, say, cohort 4 (17 year olds). To adjust for these cohort differences we used propensity weighting (Rosenbaum and Rubin 1983) procedures to adjust for differences across our cohorts. Results indicated no significant cohort differences (see Table 2 weighted models), indicating we can treat our data as one continuous cohort (age 15–25). We used the final propensity weight in all subsequent analyses.Next, we fit a taxonomy of auto-regressive latent trajectory with structured residuals (ALT-SR) models (Curran et al  2014) to examine the simultaneous between and within-person effects of victimization, binge drinking and impulse control across both adolescence and young adulthood. Fit statistics (Comparative Fit Index (CFI), Root Mean Square Error of Approximation (RMSEA), and Standardized Root Mean Square Residual (SRMR)) were used to assess improvement in model specification.Though missing data were minimal (~10% across 7 years), we utilized full-information maximum likelihood (FIML) estimator in Mplus version 7.4 (Muthén and Muthén 1998–2012) for all analyses. Propensity WeightingOverall, our propensity weighting resulted in reduced maximum standard effect sizes across all four cohorts (see Table 4). For instance, transitions refer to the actual process of change whereas trajectories are defined as patterns of systematic and successive change over time (Elder 1998). Thus, we seek to understand how certain transitions (e.g., adolescence to young adulthood) are embedded into individual trajectories (e.g., binge drinking) that help point to important periods of life, which may reflect increases or decreases in functioning (e.g., variation in binge drinking trajectories based on age related transitions) (Rutter 1996). First, we considered limiting the number of control variables used in the model as our model utilized both propensity weighting and the weighting variables as controls for each model (doubly robust). Results of our model resulted in better model fit (expected given fewer parameters to estimate; CFI = .998, RMSEA = .028, SRMR = .030) with no changes to parameter estimates in both the overall and developmental model. Results of our models directly replicated our findings in both significance and direction of effects. However, it appears that beta estimates were slightly higher when excluding parent/caregiver data. Finally, post-hoc mediation analyses point to an important developmental difference between adolescence and young adulthood. Theoretical ContributionsOverall, these results support to several theoretical orientations. Specifically, our results lend to further support Gottfredson and Hirschi’s (1990)General Theory of Crime, which posits that deviant and criminal behaviors result from diminished self-control. Specifically, it may be that the current sample of early-onset juvenile offenders have initial deficits in self-control, thus putting them at greater risk for subsequent deviant behaviors (i.e., binge drinking) and further victimization. That is, we found developmental variation in the transition from adolescence to young adulthood in terms of individual levels of impulse control and victimization.Our findings further support the theory of allostatic load (McEwen 2003) and the self-control strength model (Baumeister and Vohs 2003). One intervention option is TARGET (Trauma Affect Regulation: Guide for Education and Therapy (Ford and Russo 2006). One intervention option is TARGET (Trauma Affect Regulation: Guide for Education and Therapy (Ford and Russo 2006). Thus, when an individual exerts repetitive efforts to self-regulate behavior, attempts thereafter should, in theory, fail, indicating a lapse in time when decision-making and impulsivity may play a larger role in problematic behaviors. That is, when using longitudinal structural equation models (such as the ARCL) estimates are an odd amalgam of both within and between-person variance, thus making it difficult, if not impossible, to interpret. Participants (Table 1) were predominantly male (87%), low socio-economic status (e.g., 80% of parents held a high school degree or less), and ethnically diverse with 41% participants identifying as African American, 34% as Hispanic, 21% as White, and 4% as Other. Example items include “have you been chased when you thought the person chasing you would hurt you in the past 12 months,” “have you been sexually assaulted,” and “have you been attacked with a weapon?” Reliability estimates range from α = .68 to 0.79. 