However, Cited2−/− eyes were predominantly featured by excessive and disorganized vasculature in the developing vitreous that was positive for expression CD31 (Fig. Further mechanistic studies have provided evidence that Cited2 plays pivotal roles in these processes through its transcriptional modulator functions for HIF-1 (Yin et al , 2002; Xu et al , 2007), AP2α (Tcfap2α – Mouse Genome Informatics) signaling (Bamforth et al , 2001; Bamforth et al , 2004), Hnf4α (Qu et al , 2007) and through other, as yet unknown, mechanisms. In this report, we show for the first time that Cited2 deficiency results in abnormal corneal-lenticular stalk formation and vitreous hypercellularity consisting of aberrant vasculature in the developing eye. In α-TN4-1 cells, Cited2 overexpression significantly increased LE9-P0 reporter activity (Fig. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) was then carried out to test whether Cited2 is physically present on the Pax6 ectoderm enhancer and the P0 promoter region using chromatin prepared from α-TN4-1 cells. The results showed that Cited2 is present on the genomic region covering the LE9 sequence and the Pax6 P0 promoter (Fig. 6Fa,b), but absent in other regions upstream of the Pax6 P0 promoter (Fig. 6E, Cited2−/−;Pax6− mouse embryos reproducibly displayed corneal-lenticular stalk formation (n=2) (Fig. These data provide direct evidence that decreased Pax6 expression is indeed responsible for the corneal-lenticular stalk formation in Cited2-deficient embryos. 7C), whereas no lacZ staining was detected in Cited2flox/flox;Le-Cre−control eyes (Fig. Cited2flox/flox mice were mated with Le-Cre+ mice to generate Cited2flox/flox;Le-Cre− and Cited2flox/flox;Le-Cre+ mice. 7K), and the latter was confirmed by immunostaining for α smooth muscle actin, which labels the pericytes that stabilize the vessels (Fig. These compound mice were then mated with Cited2+/− mice to obtain Cited2−/− embryos with and without the transgene at 14.5 dpc. Proliferation assays did not reveal any obvious changes in Cited2-deficient embryos compared with their wild-type littermate controls. In addition, the Le-Cre transgene driven by the Pax6 upstream ectoderm enhancer and the P0 promoter in the Cited2-null background efficiently deletes floxed Hif1a (Fig. Phosphorylated histone H3 immunostaining was performed with anti-phospho-H3 antibody (Cell Signaling) and the staining was visualized with Alexa488-conjugated anti-rabbit secondary antibody (Molecular Probes, Invitrogen). lacZ expression was detected by X-Gal (Roche) staining and was performed on 1% paraformaldehyde-fixed eye sections according to standard methods. TUNEL assayCryosections were collected from 10.5 dpc embryos after fixation in 4% paraformaldehyde and processed for the TUNEL assay according to the manufacturer’s instruction (Chemicon). The real-time PCR was performed in triplicate for each sample on MyiQ (BioRad). Relative luciferase activity was calculated by dividing firefly luciferase activity by Renilla luciferase activity. Cited2 expression was detected in the surface ectoderm at 9.5 dpc (Fig. The corneal-lenticular stalk was further examined by immunostaining of E-cadherin. In addition, a distinctive endothelial layer on the posterior side of the cornea developed in wild-type eyes by 15.5 dpc (see Fig. These initial in vitro studies underscore the potential roles of Cited2 in different biological processes. 