We next established primary cultures of the brain tumor induced by the combined activation of H-Ras and AKT in GFAP-Cre Tp53+/− mice and determined that the cultures contained brain tumor–initiating stem cells (BTICs). The tumor showed glioma-like histopathology, including increased cellular density, necrosis within the dense cellular lesion and intratumoral hemorrhage (Fig. Because GFAP+ cells in the hippocampus or subventricular zone are likely to contain both differentiated astrocytes and neural progenitor cells8,28, these cell types could be the cellular origin of the glioblastoma multiforme–like tumors in our model. One of the advantages of our strategy is that this method can be used to clarify the differences between tumors caused by the same oncogenic events occurring in different regions of the brain. To construct pTomo H-RasV12, we amplified N-terminus Flag-tagged H-RasV12 from pGEM H-RasV12 by PCR and inserted it into the BamHI site of the pTomo vector. To construct pTomo H-RasV12, we amplified N-terminus Flag-tagged H-RasV12 from pGEM H-RasV12 by PCR and inserted it into the BamHI site of the pTomo vector. To construct pTomo H-RasV12, we amplified N-terminus Flag-tagged H-RasV12 from pGEM H-RasV12 by PCR and inserted it into the BamHI site of the pTomo vector. We confirmed all PCR fragments by sequencing. We transferred the proteins to a nitrocellulose membrane and probed the membrane with the antibodies listed in Supplementary Table 3 online. The antibodies used are listed in Supplementary Table 3. For detection with fluorescence, we cut 40-μm coronal sections on a sliding microtome and processed the sections for standard immunohistochemical staining as previously described34. For H&E staining, we embedded the fixed brains in paraffin, cut them into 6-μm sections and stained with H&E. We obtained the images with a Retiga digital camera on a Nikon optical microscope and analyzed them with OpenLab software (Improvision). We also acquired T2-weighted anatomical images before with a two-dimensional fast spin-echo sequence TR / TE = 2900/35.5, FA 90, BW 15.63. The after-contrast dataset was semi-manually segmented and volume-rendered with Amira software (Template Graphic Software) to produce quantitative three-dimensional models of the area of contrast enhancement in the brain tissue. 1d) and oligodendrocytes (detected by the marker O4, data not shown), which is consistent with a previous report10. Control GFAP-Cre mice injected with mock vectors showed no tumor formation (Supplementary Table 1). Consistent with this result, the overexpression of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) and VEGF receptor-2 (VEGFR2) in the tumor tissues were observed (Fig. 