Although the A1 and A2 phenotypes were not proposed to be universal or all-encompassing, they became widely misinterpreted as evidence for a binary polarization of reactive astrocytes in either neurotoxic or neuroprotective states, which could be readily identified in any CNS disease, acute or chronic, by their correlative marker genes in a manner similar to the once-popular, but now discarded, Th1–Th2 lymphocyte and M1–M2 microglia polarization theories73. Thus, the mere expression of some or even all these marker genes does not prove the presence of functions that these genes have not been demonstrated to exert. Nonetheless, two new names have recently been coined to describe the extremes of six astrocytic transcriptional clusters detected by snRNAseq in the hippocampus of AD transgenic and wild-type mice78. When addressing similar issues for neurons, scientists are not concerned about categorizing disease-associated neurons into simple generalizable subtypes; rather, the emphasis is placed on understanding specific changes of defined neuronal populations in specific diseases. First, there is a need to unequivocally clarify whether or not reactive astrocytes and their associated signaling pathways significantly contribute to the pathogenesis of specific CNS diseases. Notably, isolation protocols may not always be optimal for astrocytes, resulting in low numbers of cells or nuclei being sequenced, and some highly relevant but weakly expressed transcripts, such as transcription factors and plasma-membrane receptors, may be overlooked, particularly in snRNAseq. Alternatively, the diversity within astrocyte populations from mouse models may be dissected out by combining fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) and cell-surface markers identified in screens71. Acute metabolic damage with the mitochondrial toxin MPTP does not replicate chronic Parkinson’s disease (PD), to cite another example of in vivo inappropriate modelling. To complicate things further, the outcome of activating a signaling pathway may depend on the upstream stimuli82 or priming caused by previous exposure to other stimuli97, perhaps through epigenetic control40. Biomarkers of reactive astrocytes in human disease will indeed be needed to demonstrate target engagement of future astrocyte-directed therapies in clinical trials. Emerging reactive-astrocyte biomarkers are either measured in blood or cerebrospinal fluid (for example, YKL-40)115 or used for brain imaging, such as MAO-B-based positron emission tomography (PET)116, which provides important topographical information (Table 1)117. Plausibly, disease-specific biomarker signatures rather than single ubiquitous biomarkers will be needed. The present working consensus for research guidelines will hopefully boost more coordinated and better focused efforts to improve and therapeutically exploit our knowledge about the role(s) of reactive astrocytes in CNS diseases and injuries. Expression of GFAP is also modulated by physiological stimuli such as physical activity19, exposure to enriched environments19, and glucocorticoids20, and it fluctuates with circadian rhythms in the suprachiasmatic nucleus21. Finally, there are discrepancies between observed GFAP mRNA and protein levels, perhaps due to differential regulation of translation, post-translational modifications, protein half-life, and antibody epitope accessibility. For example, activation of STAT3-dependent transcription is beneficial in neonatal white matter injury47, traumatic brain injury30, spinal cord injury48,49, and motor neuron injury50, but detrimental in AD models42,43. 