The supernatant was collected and centrifuged at 80,000g for 60 minutes at 4°C to pellet the CPV virions. The t-CPV cryoEM images were recorded on a new Gatan K2 direct electron detection camera attached to a Gatan imaging filter (GIF Quanta) with a pixel size of 1.36Å at the specimen scale (Extended Data Fig. The centers of all particles were then fixed and used for the asymmetrical global search with Frealign using 4x binned data set starting at 20 Å resolution.To generate an initial model, we placed the crystal structure of the MRV RdRP2 under a previously obtained CPV capsid map35 at the location corresponding to that in MRV capsid as previously reported9 and imposed a tetrahedral symmetry (i.e., with 4 three-fold axes, 3 two-fold axes and 12 asymmetric units), resulting in a montage map with an empty CPV capsid containing 12 RdRPs but without any VP4. After 9 iterations of global search and 2 iterations of refinement, the resolution of the density map was determined to be 3.9Å. The task of the rest of the fourth stage of data processing is to select one out of these 60 orientation candidates to be the asymmetric orientation of the particle as done before4,5,43. The result is the same, confirming our procedure was not influenced by the choice of initial model. Additionally, refinement was also performed based on the Ramachandran plot, an important indicator of three-dimensional protein structure that validates the torsion angles of a protein chain. The effective resolutions of the local averaged maps are ~3.3 Å (c) and ~4.0 Å (d) resolution (FSC≥0.143) for maps in the quiescent and transcribing, respectively. An icosahedral 5-fold axis is indicated with a small green pentagon. An icosahedral 5-fold axis is indicated with a small green pentagon. f, The same as (e) but in a different view to show the unambiguous trace of the two peptide fragments. 4 and Supplementary Video 1); instead, many extend tangentially from one TEC to another (e.g., duplexes i-iii in Fig. 1g) binds to each of the 10 TECs at the same relative position and orientation, suggesting that this RNA duplex is a conserved feature among the 10 dsRNA segments. Moreover, the organization of TECs with the dsRNA genome and the mechanism of transcriptional activation have remained mysteries, in contrast to the well understood genome organization inside dsDNA viruses4,5. A GTP is identified (Figs 1g, 3a) at the position equivalent to the cap-binding site observed in the MRV RdRP2. We anticipate that detachment of the RNA duplex would permit RNA to slide towards the template entry channel for RNA synthesis in t-CPV. In addition to enclosing the viral genome and anchoring TECs, the capsid shell protein (CSP) also regulates polymerase activity in dsRNA viruses22-25. A CSP N-terminal fragment, unresolved in all previous structures21,28-30, is resolved here to form a helix in the two TEC-interacting CSP subunits in both q-CPV and t-CPV (Fig. 