The coculture was first treated with a crosslinking reagent, disuccinimidyl glutarate (DSG), before immunoprecipitation. Therefore, expression of Notch ligands in mesothelial cells derived from benign effusions or purified from tumor tissues was analyzed. The data demonstrated that Hes5 and Pbx1 promoter activities in A2780 cell were significantly induced by co-culturing with J cells but not with L cells. In contrast, we did not detect luciferase activity from Hes1 promoter reporter or vector control plasmid in any of the experimental conditions. 5C) and colony formation assay (Fig. First, we asked if constitutive expression of the NICD could reverse the growth inhibitory effect of Jagged-1 shRNA. S6, the results demonstrated that Notch3 siRNA did not significantly affect Jagged-1 mRNA expression, suggesting a lack of such feedback loop in ovarian cancer cells. This suggests that in ovarian carcinoma Jagged-1 interacted with Notch3 in juxtacrine fashion. This suggests that in ovarian carcinoma Jagged-1 interacted with Notch3 in juxtacrine fashion. First, Jagged-1 was co-expressed with Notch3 in a significant number of ovarian cancers. The soluble Jagged-1 intracellular fragment translocates into the nucleus and activates gene expression via the transcription factor AP1 (15). Parental L cell and J cells stably expressing the hemagglutinin (HA)-tagged Jagged-1 protein were generously provided by Dr. G Weinmaster (Department of Biological Chemistry, UCLA). The mesothelial cells used in this study were found to be positive for calretinin (a mesothelial cell marker) in more than 99% of cells and negative for Ber-EP4 and mucin 4 (carcinoma markers) as determined by immunocytochemistry. Data was further normalized to the result obtained from ovarian surface epithelial cell, OSE7. Gene knockdown using siRNA and shRNAJagged-1 small hairpin RNA (shRNA) vectors were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO). Cells were transfected with siRNA or shRNA at a final concentration of 200 nM or 2 μg, respectively, using lipofectamine method (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Immunointensity for Jagged-1 was scored as negative/low and high; nuclear staining for Notch3 was scored as negative (-) and positive (+) by two investigators. Cell growth and colony formation assaysCells were grown in 96-well plates at a density of 3,000 per well. OVCAR3 cells were irradiated for 30 minutes with 68 cGy/min while L cell, J cell, and mesothelial cells were irradiated at the same intensity for 8 minutes. Disuccinimidyl glutarate (DSG), a crosslinking reagent, was added to the culture at a final concentration of 20 μM and incubated for 30 min. The reporter luciferase was normalized to Renilla luciferase and the ratio of luminescence from the experimental reporter to luminescence from the control reporter was calculated. The specificity of the Jagged-1 antibody was demonstrated by Western blot analysis. The Notch3 antibody used for immunohistochemistry has been previously reported (3) and its specificity was further validated by Western blot. 