Similar effects were seen if the mother had two wild type copies of CYP2E1 (44) or AhR (45). Most have focused specifically on changes in DNA methylation and histone modifications. In this manner, we will seek to understand the complex interplay of genomic and epigenomic factors which relate a given clinical condition or phenotype, to susceptibility by virtue of genotype and environmental exposure. Using the BUAL method in rat, the methylation status of DNA within pancreatic islets of IUGR offspring was determined. Although smoking per se did not affect global methylation, a significant correlation between paternal DNA methylation and that of the offspring was lost if either the father or offspring ever smoked. Smoking may therefore affect global DNA methylation. Global DNA methylation status in newborn cord blood is associated with cord blood serum cotinine levels (68). Global DNA methylation levels were lowest in newborns with the highest serum cotinine levels. More detailed analysis are in order to determine if other epigenetic changes such as histone modifications or non-coding RNAs are affected as well. The significance of the changes in DNA methylation patterns needs to be determined. Women who quit smoking during pregnancy have infants who weigh more than those who continue to smoke, and also have an increased likelihood of having infants who weigh the same when compared to women who never smoked (11). In addition to preterm birth, smoking has been linked to preterm premature rupture of membranes (preterm PROM). This process is defined as rupture of membranes prior to 37 weeks of gestation and is the second most common cause of preterm delivery. PAH can be found in the environment and the carcinogenic properties are well characterized. (29, 30) Catalysis of PAH usually requires the coordination of two phases of enzymatic activity. The first step in processing xenobiotic compounds is metabolism by the Phase I enzymes, which include members of the Cytochrome P450 (CYP) family and Epoxide Hydrolase (31). CYP2A6, a Phase I enzyme, is the major Phase I CYP family member enzyme responsible for breaking down nicotine (32) (Figure 1C). (35) Because the products from Phase I metabolism are potentially toxic to the cell due to their high reactivity, coordination of both phases of enzymatic activity is essential for cell survival. Maternal CYP1A1 genotype was determined as either AA, Aa or aa, where “a” represents the well-characterized MspI polymorphism (37). When comparing non smoking mothers with the AA genotypes of CYP1A1 and the GSTT1 present allele to smoking mothers with either Aa or aa CYP1A1 and GSTT1 (null) there is also a significant association with pre term delivery and lower gestational age (38, 39). 