Although down-regulation of IFN-γ receptor expression has been suggested as one mechanism that protects TH1 lymphocytes from IFN-γ-dependent inhibition19,20, this process occurs only in fully differentiated TH1 cells and thus does not explain how developing T cells survive and proliferate in the presence of autocrine and paracrine IFN-γ during early stages of the response. These findings argue that in the absence of Irgm1, IFN-γ-mediated cell death results primarily from autophagy and this involves a caspase-independent mechanism distinct from that previously described for IFN-γ-dependent death of Igrm1-sufficient CD4+ T lymphocytes16. This activity of Irgm1 is likely to be particularly important in the establishment and maintenance of TH1 responses to persistent intracellular infections. A set of these genes strongly induced by the cytokine encodes the p47 kDa GTPase family21,22. The above difference likely reflects the failure of Irgm1 to be induced in the IFN-γ deficient setting of a TH2 response. Similarly, although the induction requirements and regulatory activity of Irgm1 resemble those of suppressor of cytokine signaling-1 (SOCS1), a known interferon-inducible regulator of IFN-γ signaling, Irgm1 appears to exert distinct regulatory functions when compared to SOCS1. Moreover, the duration and magnitude of tyrosine phosphorylation of STAT1 was not enhanced in IFN-γ stimulated Irgm1–/– CD4+ T cells, in direct contrast to the augmented STAT1 phosphorylation previously described for SOCS1 deficiency43. Although originally recognized as an essential cell survival response to starvation, autophagy has now been shown to play a more general role in maintaining cellular homeostasis46,47. IFN-γ is a potent stimulus of autophagy in macrophages and plays an important role in the clearance of pathogens in these cells25,48. The common mechanism underlying these distinct activities is presently unclear although the data presented here suggest the autophagic process as a likely candidate worthy of further investigation. Mycobacterium avium26 and Trypanosoma cruzi27 infected Irgm1–/– mice develop a profound pancytopenia, a defect that we have recently shown to be associated with impaired expansion of Irgm1–/– hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell populations28. All mice were maintained in specific pathogen free conditions at an AALAC accredited animal facility at the NIAID, NIH (Bethesda, MD) under a study proposal approved by the NIAID Animal Care and Use Committee. In some experiments, recombinant cytokines IL-4 (10 ng/ml), IL-12 (10 ng/ml) and IL-2 (10 – 50 U/ml) as well as mAb specific for IL-4 (11B11,10 μg /ml), IL-12p40 (C17.8,10 μg /ml) and IFN-γ (XMG 6, 10 μg /ml) were included. StatisticsMann-Whitney test was used to determine the significance of differences between groups. Finally, the Irgm1-dependent defect was observed only upon TCR triggering since Irgm1–/– lymphocytes did not show reduced viability relative to wild-type cells when cultured in medium only (Supplementary Fig. To confirm this finding in a setting in which IFN-γ is completely absent, we crossed Ifng–/– and Irgm1–/– mice to generate animals deficient in both genes. IFN-γ directly triggers death of Irgm1–/– CD4+ T cellsTo characterize the mechanism of IFN-γ dependent suppression of Irgm1–/– CD4+ lymphocytes, we examined the effects of exogenous IFN-γ on the division and death of anti-CD3 activated Ifng–/– and Irgm1–/–Ifng–/– CD4+ T cells. Irradiated Ifng–/– APCs were used in these experiments to completely exclude endogenous production of the cytokine. 