IF showed that Twist2 was barely detectable in the vector transfectants (Fig. To confirm that Twist2 is responsible for p12-induced EMT, siRNA was used to knockdown Twist2 expression in p12 transfectants. Transient transfection with synthetic double-stranded siRNA was used because we failed to establish stable Twist-2 siRNA transfectants. The average distance of vector and p12 transfectants that migrated from the wounded edge was 100 ± 90 and 550 ± 150 μm, respectively, in 24 h (Fig. Numerous metastatic lesions were formed from intravenously injected vector transfectants after 4 weeks in all animals (n=6) (Fig. We therefore examined the protein levels of desmoplakin, N-cadherin as well as Twist-2 in E-cadherin re-expressed cells. Since we have shown in Figure 4D that only EMT cells were able to intravasate, a conceivable interpretation of these results would be that EMT cells invaded into the surrounding tissues and intravasated so that the obstacles were cleared for non-EMT cells to migrate and to enter the circulation.Visible lung metastases formed in 3 of the 6 animals (Fig. 6D, top panels) indicating that they were derived from DsRed-positive cells. 6D, bottom right), consistent with them being non-EMT cells. 6D, bottom right), consistent with them being non-EMT cells. 5), suggesting that either there are uncharacterized factors in our experimental system that are important or MET is not an integral part for metastasis. Under this circumstance, both EMT and non-EMT cells, represented by GFP and DsRed expression, respectively, were detectable in blood stream but only non-EMT cells were detected in the lung metastases (Fig. p12 antisense expression was induced by 25 μM ZnSO4 for 24 h. To induce EMT of the vector and antisense transfectants of HaCaT cells, a mixture of TGF-β (10 ng/ml) and EGF (30 ng/ml) was added and the cells were incubated in the presence of Zn2+ (25 μM) for 48 h (20). qRT-PCR assay of E-cadherinThe hamster E-cadherin primer set was designed based on the hamster E-cadherin cDNA sequence. RT-PCR analysis of E-cadherin repressorsThe mRNA levels of E-cadherin repressors including E12/E47, Snail, Slug, Twist1, Twist2, ZEB-1, and ZEB-2 were analyzed by RT-PCR with the primer sets shown bellow. DsRed, first primer set: F, 5′-CTTCGCCTGGGACATCCTG-3′; R, 5′-TGGGTCACGGTCGCCACGCC-3′. #610404), a goat anti-vimentin pAb (Santa Cruz, #sc-7939), and a mouse anti-human Twist2 mAb (abcam, #ab57997) at RT for 1 h. After washing with PBS, Alexa 488-labeled goat anti-rabbit IgG, Alexa 555-labeled donkey anti-goat IgG, and Alexa 555-labeled goat anti-mouse IgG were used to visualize E-cadherin, vimentin, and Twist2, respectively. 1, the morphology of the pMTCB6+-HaCaT vector control transfectants changed from epithelial to fibroblastic (Fig. Western blotting shows that the p12 protein level in the vector control transfectants was induced by TGF-β and EGF and was decreased in the antisense transfectants both in the absence and presence of TGF-β and EGF (Fig. The polygonal vector transfectants were surrounded by the p12 transfectants as shown by red (Fig. The loss of E-cadherin expression, and the gain of vimentin expression in p12 transfectants were confirmed by Western blotting analysis (Fig. 