Expanding the heterocyclic scope to include dissymmetric substrates, epimerizable stereocenters, electrophilic functionalities (e.g., carbonyl, nitrile), remote basic amines, heteroaromatics, and halogenated aromatics remains a major challenge to be overcome for widespread use in late-stage diversification. This analog and others are now accessible via cross-coupling with methylated intermediate 47. An S1P1 antagonist, whose benzylic and aromatic methylations afforded a 2135-fold potency increase6, was methylated in its methyl ester form (51, Fig. Catalyst control could be leveraged to influence the site- and chemoselectivity of C–H hydroxylation in a broad range of heterocycles (Fig. H2O2)27, oxidation of arylated γ-lactam 2 afforded a significant amount of over-oxidation to the corresponding imide (Fig. In contrast, exposure of alcohol 4a to the forcing conditions afforded predominantly imide 4b (54%) with only 17% hemiaminals. High functional group tolerance was also expected given organoaluminum reagents’ ability to methylate oxoniums at late stages in the presence of other electrophilic functionalities34. When unreacted hemiaminal acetate is observed, esterification of the hemiaminal by trifluoroacetic anhydride (TFAA) and subsequent activation of both esters with trimethylsilyl triflate (TMSOTf) to furnish the iminium can be employed34. Alternative activation modes with AlMe3 and methylating reagents with DAST were examined (Extended Data). We explored the ability of highly site- and chemoselective Mn(CF3PDP) 1 catalyzed C–H hydroxylation, coupled to a Lewis-acid/fluorine-promoted methylation, to provide a general method for installing methyl groups directly into the hydrocarbon cores of complex, bioactive molecules, thereby avoiding lengthy and costly de novo synthesis (Fig. Such cross-couplings have shown broad scope with respect to alkyl electrophiles but limited scope of the metalated heterocyclic intermediates generated via substrate-controlled deprotonation or single-electron transfer (SET). While DAST activation produced similar yields, a higher diastereoselectivity was obtained with BF3 activation (6:1 vs. 3:1), possibly due to different iminium counterions (Fig. 