2 (Global Solar UV Index using a scale of 1 (or “Low”) to 11 and higher (or “Extreme”)). The major strengths of our study include the large sample size of children and adolescents with biopsy-confirmed NAFLD, documentation of vitamin D prescription, and season of measurement of serum 25(OH)-D. The study was limited by the retrospective and crosssectional design, which precluded assessing patients’ adherence to the prescribed dose of vitamin D, or impact of duration and amount of vitamin D supplementation on liver histology. Thus, three separate controls were used to validate the assay. To categorize obesity severity, patients were defined as overweight (BMI: 85th to <95th percentile for age and sex based on CDC growth charts), obese class I (BMI: 95th percentile to <120% of the 95th percentile), obese class II (BMI: 120 to <140% of the 95th percentile), or obese class III (BMI ≥ 140% of the 95th percentile) [22]. BMI group variable was always put in the model regardless of being selected or not. After controlling for age, vitamin D supplementation and season (the confounders automatically selected from a list of possible confounders (which originally also included ethnicity, BMI ɀ-score and T2DM) by the statistical model based on their significance), the vitamin D insufficiency group had two times the odds of having higher stage fibrosis compared to the vitamin D sufficiency group (adjusted OR, 2.04; 95%CI, 1.02–4.08) (Table 4). This is the largest pediatric study investigating the relationship between serum 25(OH)-D concentrations and histologic liver disease severity in children with NAFLD to date. In our study, 14.5% of deficient and 29.1% of insufficient patients had stage 2 fibrosis or worse (Table 2). The results of our study are consistent with those reported by Hourigan et al  who also did not observe an association between vitamin D levels and NAFLD severity, including fibrosis, in a multicenter North American cohort of 102 well-characterized children with biopsy-confirmed NAFLD. 