Speech was transduced with a Sennheiser K6 microphone and recorded on a DAT recorder. The recordings were transferred digitally to a PC for the perceptual tests.ListenersEight listeners were recruited, four male and four female, aged between 18 and 25 (mean age 20.3 years). The listeners could hear the texts as often as they desired and they were self-paced to avoid fatigue. To summarize, speakers' judgments about whether or not they had lost their regional accents were largely reflected in the average similarity judgments.DiscussionThe results of the ANOVA and the similarity dendrogram obtained from the hierarchical clustering analysis indicate that HC English speakers separate from other accent groups. This variable phonetic quality of the /æ/ words is, however, not captured in our features which represent the categorical presence or lack of a difference between word pairs like LASS and GLASS. A Sennheiser K6 microphone was used to record vocal responses directly onto a DAT recorder for use in the analysis, as in normal-listening conditions. The output of an additional Sennheiser K6 microphone was relayed via a Quad microphone amplifier to the Digitech model studio 400 - signal processor to produce the required signal alteration. The output of an additional Sennheiser K6 microphone was relayed via a Quad microphone amplifier to the Digitech model studio 400 - signal processor to produce the required signal alteration. The output of an additional Sennheiser K6 microphone was relayed via a Quad microphone amplifier to the Digitech model studio 400 - signal processor to produce the required signal alteration. Average similarity ratings for pairings in the different feedback conditions were combined across the four listener groups, and assessed as in Experiment one (see Table 5).For the normal feedback conditions, as in Experiment 1, the HC speakers were rated as extremely similar (M=1.11); An ANOVA contrasting accent group and loss/retention of HC again revealed a strong effect of accent loss/retention under normal feedback conditions (F(3,128) = 333, p < .001). If speakers show signs of their lost accents under altered feedback conditions, this should be revealed as less similarity to HC English speakers (as illustrated above), coupled with greater similarity to the speaker who has retained his/her accent. Under normal listening conditions, the similarity rating between speakers who had lost their accent and those who had retained their accent did not differ from the rating between speakers who had lost their accent and HC English speakers, illustrating that these speakers still retained some aspects of their original accents. These figures clearly indicate that with only a single exception (one lost-accent Northern Irish speaker in the DAF condition, NI- in the left panel of Figure 3), the speakers who had lost their accents now exhibited extremely strong tendencies to cluster with the accented speakers, rather than those from the HC English group under conditions of altered feedback. Telephones make such alterations to the voice (as well as change in its intensity). However, the apparently more robust evidence from foreign-language acquisition may also not be understood as a hard and fast rule. The experiments reported in this article address two questions about accent change: 1) Is the adopted accent of speakers living in London, and who consider that they have lost their original accent, judged to be closer to HC English than the accent of speakers who claim to have retained their accent? The texts exploit the potential differences between dialects discussed above, namely either differences in phonemic oppositions, in the lexical incidence of phonemes or in the phonetic realisation of phonemes. We are using it in this sense in as much as we refer to regional pronunciations as accented in contrast to a Home Counties (HC) pronunciation. In all cases, number of years in London was contiguous and in the period immediately prior to when the recordings were made. First, there are prosodic and segmental differences, the former referring to lexical or phrasal stressing or accentuation patterns and intonation, the latter referring to the realization of consonants and vowels1. Second, there are phonological versus phonetic differences, the former involving differences in the sound systems such as missing or additional sound oppositions (such as the absence of a difference between “fair” and “fur” in Liverpool English), the latter involving the way the properties are realized within the same framework of oppositions (e.g., northern [α=⌉] vs. a more upper class [A±⌉] for /A⌉/). 