When the focal plane was at the base of the bundle, the amplitude of the signal in R2 was reduced but in R1 it was increased as observed experimentally, consistent with the reverse diffusion hypothesis. In the present work, a similar calcium imaging approach was used but the spatial resolution was enhanced by using mammalian cochlear inner hair cells where the step in height between rows of large-diameter stereocilia allowed individual stereocilia to be imaged at the apical portion of the bundle. The current view is that the tip link is comprised of two intertwined molecules of cadherin23 at the upper end and two of protocadherin15 at the lower end 9. The prevailing view is that, during bundle deflection, calcium enters stereocilia through channels at the upper end of the tip link, interacts with myosin-1 causing the upper attachment point of the tip link to slip down the side wall, thereby reducing tension in the link and relieving stress on the channel. Measurements indicated that calcium signals arising in the first row of stereocilia were smaller in amplitude and slower to develop than in either the second or third rows supporting the conclusion that MT channels are not located in the first row. Patch pipettes were filled with an intracellular solution of composition (in mM): 135 CsCl, 2.5 MgCl2, 1 EGTA, 2.5 Na2ATP, 5 Creatine phosphate, 2 NaAscorbate, 10 CsHEPES, pH 7.2. Patch pipettes were filled with an intracellular solution of composition (in mM): 135 CsCl, 2.5 MgCl2, 1 EGTA, 2.5 Na2ATP, 5 Creatine phosphate, 2 NaAscorbate, 10 CsHEPES, pH 7.2. The swept-field confocal utilizes a stationary slit scanned with a galvanometer-driven beam also at 500 Hz and synchronized to the camera acquisition speed. This software also generated the voltage and pressure pulses which were fed through a Digidata 1320 DA converter to run the experiment. Calcium was assumed to enter through two MT channels each carrying 2.5 pA of calcium current (inner hair cell MT channels 15 pA of which 15 per cent is carried by calcium12). In recordings from more than 50 inner hair cells with MT currents up to 1 nA, no convincing evidence of signals in the first row was ever seen. In contrast in R1, small signals were measured at all three positions but paradoxically the amplitude increased towards the base (Fig. 4b) with a mean slope of 35.4 ± 1.3 pA per stereocilium at a holding potential of −80 mV. One possible reason for the smaller ratio compared to the inner hair cells is that during channel opening the calcium concentration in the stereocilia may be higher due to their smaller diameter and volume producing greater dye saturation. 