Prior SARS-CoV-2 exposure and recovery may also promote sensitivity and susceptibility to RT-mediated lung injury and fibrosis in cancer patients. While several other COVID-19 therapies are being evaluated, to date, only two drugs have shown improved outcomes: the steroid Dexamethasone lowers the odds of death (10), and the antiviral Remdesivir shortens oxygen dependency and recovery time but does not improve survival (11). Further, there might be differences in the dynamics of response of endothelial cells between preclinical models and humans to a given dose of radiation. Most of these trials are open-label, single institution, non-randomized studies, but some randomized trials are also emerging. The pathological evolution toward severe ailment does not always depend on viral load and culminates in a combination of symptoms. The evidence for some effectiveness of anti-viral therapy during the moderate phase and steroid therapy during the severe phase was also presented. A reanalysis of several animal datasets from experiments performed decades ago testing RT for bacterial and viral pneumonia reveal that results are heterogeneous, but collectively indicate lack of efficacy of RT after infection (https://arxiv.org/abs/2008.02625v3). SARS-CoV-2 in the lung targets primarily bronchial and alveolar epithelial cells, but other targets are likely, including immune cells. Immune cells, especially the myeloid subsets, are activated to phagocytose debris in the inflammatory site while dendritic cells (DC) present antigen to stimulate adaptive immunity in primary lymphoid tissues. Vascular endothelial cells play a central role in responding to and producing cytokines that further drive cytokine production and lead to a coagulation response, mainly through the extrinsic pathway involving tissue factor and Factor VIIa. Given these findings, it is not surprising that attempts are being made to target inflammation in COVID-19 (43), including IL-6 blocking antibodies, IL-1R agonists, NADPH oxidase (NOX) inhibitors, dexamethasone, JAK1 inhibitors, and now LDRT. Figure 3 illustrates the timeline of dynamic changes in lungs resulting from SARS-CoV-2 exposure, causing anti-viral immune response and inflammatory response, leading to ARDS and multiorgan failure due to hyperinflammation. 