Studies have shown that dolasetron is as effective as the local anaesthetic lidocaine at preventing pain, but may not be as effective in preventing shivering [56,57]. For example, the deletion of the 5-HT3 receptor gene creates knockout mice that exhibit anxiolytic behaviour [80,81] and the use of 5-HT3 receptor antagonists has shown a range of anxiolytic effects [82]. However, many antipsychotic drugs are known to have a broad spectrum of activity, only some of which can be attributed to affects on the 5-HT3 receptor. Following tissue injury, the mechanism of pain and inflammation appears to be complex. However, as the effects of this drug can only be seen 3 – 12 weeks after first use, the emergence of nausea in some patients is of importance. It has been shown that the systemic administration of the compounds has beneficial affects for patients suffering from fibromyalgia and the side effects of these compounds are few and often inconsequential. However, as the development costs of new therapeutics continue to rise, we may find new uses for existing compounds. These brain regions are protected by the blood–brain barrier with the exception of the area postrema and the nucleus tractus solitarius. These models indicate that the ligand binding site lies at the interface of two adjacent subunits and is formed by three loops (A – C) from the ‘principal’ subunit and three β-strands (D – F) from the adjacent or ‘complementary’ subunit. Comprehensive reviews of the 5-HT3 ligand binding site can be found in Thompson et al  [27,28]. M2 residues that lie along one side of an α-helix line the water-accessible pore [30,31], and a kink at the centre of the M2 helices forms a hydrophobic constriction that represents the channel gate. A possible therapeutic role for these charged residues is discussed in Section 5 of this review. Each subunit is composed of an extracellular, a transmembrane and an intracellular domain (Figure 1). Although it was shown that the modulatory effects of n-alcohols and anaesthetics can be altered by mutations here, the authors concluded that they did not represent a binding site for these agents [36,37]. This difference is the consequence of three arginine residues that lie within an α-helix in the M3 – M4 loop (Figure 1) [40]. The binding site is formed at the interface of two adjacent subunits by the convergence of three amino acid loops (A – C) from one (the principal) subunit and three β-strands (D – F) from the adjacent (or complementary) subunit. Such disease targets include addiction, pruritis, emesis, fibromyalgia, migraine, rheumatic diseases and neurological phenomena such as anxiety, psychosis, nociception and cognitive function. Other possible targets are chronic heart pain and bulimia. Other possible targets are chronic heart pain and bulimia. Fortunately, despite a range of actions, 5-HT3 receptor antagonists do not appear to alter normal behaviour in animal models, and the only typical physiological changes in clinical volunteers are mild effects on gut transit, constipation, headache, dizziness and clinically insignificant asymptomatic changes in cardiovascular behaviour [45]. 