Five-lead electrodes were placed according to standard ECG placement recommendations (Hoetink et al , 2002) and each waveform was verified or edited prior to analyses. The stress tasks consisted of a standard speech task, in which participants were told to imagine that they were in a department store shopping and the security guard falsely accused them of shoplifting a belt. The link between psychological control and blunted heart rate response was no longer significant with the mediators in the model, suggesting full mediation. This long-term, multi-method study identified a previously unrecognized potential social-developmental pathway from a range of interpersonal behaviors beginning in adolescence to disruption of basic physiological and social processes in adulthood. We posit that adolescents who experience the insidious stressor of overcontrolling parenting could well have both difficulty physiologically rising to the challenge of a stressor, which involves both upregulating sympathetic and downregulating parasympathetic functions. The current findings are consistent with the idea of allostatic load: Individuals who experience chronic stressors are compromised in their ability to respond physiologically to maintain homeostasis. These participants also went on to cope by denying the existence of problems. Individuals who begin adolescence with serious intrusions on their autonomy are likely to be set upon a maladaptive path that is stressful and taxing. In addition, interventions such as assertiveness training in adolescence and young adulthood may be of particular relevance to cardiovascular functioning. Similarly, although our use of lagged data allows us to understand the development of problems over time, the data is not experimental and does not allow us to make causal arguments. While our sample was diverse and representative of the population from which it was drawn, we are also unable to make cross-cultural comparisons. Withdrawn individuals are also likely to form relationships with similarly withdrawn partners, reinforcing these maladaptive interpersonal styles (Collins, Cooper, Albino, & Allard, 2002; McPherson, Smith-Lovin, & Cook, 2001; Stanley, Markman, & Whitton, 2002). In addition to threatening a fundamental developmental need for autonomy, psychological control has the potential to undermine the connection between the adolescent and his or her attachment figures during this important transition. The sample was demographically diverse and representative of the population from which it was drawn (baseline median family income was in the $40,000 to $59,000 range; the sample was 58% European-American, 29% African-American, 1% Asian, 1% Hispanic, .5% American Indian, 8% mixed race, and 2% other races/ethnicities). Students were recruited via an initial mailing to all parents of students in the school, along with follow-up contact efforts at school lunches. Adolescents who indicated they were interested in the study were contacted by telephone. To maximize the number of romantic partners able to participate, dyads were recruited if they had an eligible romantic partner at any time within a span of three years to complete observational and questionnaire measures. Participants reported an average relationship length of 1.18 years (SD = 1.25 years). MeasuresPsychological control from parents (Age 13).Adolescents completed the 10-item Psychological Control vs. The coding system employed yields ratings from zero to four for each participant’s overall behavior toward his/her partner in the interaction with lower scores indicating more withdrawal (Allen, Hauser, Bell, & McElhaney, 2000; Allen et al , 1994). Participants’ and partners’ scores were averaged together to capture the amount of autonomy and relatedness shown at the dyadic level, an approach previously found to yield highly valid data (Allen et al , 2003). Although Cronbach’s alpha is not a perfect indicator for a rank system, internal consistency was classified as poor (Cronbach’s α = .53-.57).Coping via denial (Ages 22-24).We used the two-item denial coping subscale from the Brief COPE, as reported by the participant’s identified close friend. 