First, the BAD attached to PfCRT-hb would obviously compete for avidin–HRP conjugate detection with the biotin moiety attached to AzBCQ, making quantitation impossible (residual biotin would remain even after Factor Xa cleavage; cf. However, since the probe is exceedingly reactive and since strong effects of pH on that chemistry are not expected (14), the former is more likely. Using this methodology (Figure 4), we then quantified the effects of important photolabeling reaction parameters. Since the absolute efficiency of photolabeling is a function of several variables, we plot both absolute densitometry results for the three isoforms (panel B) as well as percent labeling, normalized to the maximal labeling for each isoform (panel C). We now know that the Cl atom is crucial for full activity of the 4-aminoquinoline, so some differences in our results versus those in ref 7 are to be expected; this might also explain why the earlier probe did not label proteins with a mass equal to that of PfCRT. However, this is overly simplistic since environmental effects that are unrelated to probe affinity can also influence the net efficiency of the photolabeling reaction. Again perhaps not coincidentally, residue 371 lying within this loop is mutated in a number of well-known CQR P. falciparum strains and isolates, including Dd2, W2, FCB, 2300 (Indonesia), and 742 (Cambodia). Electrospray ionization mass spectra (ESI-MS) were collected on a Thermo Finnigan LCQ instrument. N-Alkylation of 4 with 3-iodo-1-propanol 8 gave alcohol 9 in 62% yield. Removal of the carbamoyl protecting group with 2 M HCl furnished amino alcohol 10 in 97% yield, which was used without further purification. A DNA sequence encoding six consecutive histidine residues (6H) and a Factor Xa recognition sequence (IDGR) was designed as two complementary 45 bp primers with sticky ends simulating NotI- and XmaI-cleaved sites. The CMs were diluted to 2 mg/mL in wash buffer [50 mM Tris-HCl, 250 mM sucrose, 20% (v/v) glycerol, and 1 mM MgCl2 (pH 7.5), supplemented with 3 M NaCl] and centrifuged at 100000g for 1 h. A loss of 4% protein was assumed on the basis of control experiments, and the washed pellet was resuspended at 2 mg/mL in solubilization buffer (wash buffer supplemented with 500 mM NaCl and 1% DM). Alternatively, the detergent extract was applied to a column packed with 2 mL of 50% monomeric avidin slurry (Pierce), washed twice with 10 bed volumes of solubilization buffer, and eluted with 6 bed volumes of elution buffer (solubilization buffer supplemented with 5 mM d-biotin). In either case, the column eluate was immediately mixed with E. coli lipid to a final concentration of 1.4% lipid, tumbled gently for 30 min, and then transferred to Float-A-Lyzer dialysis tubing (cutoff of approximately 25000 Da). The solution was aliquoted into wells of a 96-well plate, and appropriate drugs were added as described in Results. The plate was then exposed to UV radiation (220–280 nm; 254 nm maximum) from a hand-held lamp (Spectroline model ENF-280C, 115 V, 60 Hz, 200 mA; 8 W bulb emitting approximately 500 µW/cm2 approximately 10 cm from the bulb surface). The lamp was placed directly upon the plate so that the samples were 0.8 cm from the light source. The proteins were then transferred to two PVDF membranes at 350 mA for 1 h at a constant current. Densitometry and NormalizationBlots were analyzed using Image J (software available from the National Institutes of Health). Then 1% acetonitrile was added to just cover the acrylamide, and the tube was incubated at 37 °C with vigorous shaking for 1–3 h. The acrylamide bits were pelleted by a short centrifugation at 16000g, and the supernatant was removed.Sequencing-grade trypsin (Sigma) was reconstituted in HPLC-grade water at a concentration of 0.1 µg/µL; 0.5 µg from this stock was activated in 15 µL of 25 mM ammonium bicarbonate, and 10 µL of this mixture (0.25 µg of trypsin) was added to the protein eluted from the gel. Gel pieces were then rehydrated with 15 µL of an ammonium bicarbonate (25 mM)/acetonitrile (10%) mixture supplemented with trypsin (5 ng/µL; Promega, Madison, WI) at 37 °C for 16 h. Tryptic peptides were extracted in a 0.1% TFA/50% acetonitrile mixture and mixed with an equal volume of 5 mg/mL CHCA (Acros Organics). Samples were ionized with a fixed LASER intensity of 3800 J; 1000 LASER shots were collected per subspectrum and were shot randomly with uniform bias. Peptide masses were compared with the theoretical masses derived from the sequences for all predicted tryptic peptides (see Results) using the FindPept tool (http://ca.expasy.org/tools/findpept.html), available from ExPASy. 