Similarly, Argys et al  (2001) found that paternity is significantly more likely to be established in states with stronger genetic-testing requirements, and the likelihood of a child-support award is significantly increased in states with higher and more effective child-support enforcement expenditures. TANF and SNAP participants, for example, are required to cooperate with the state OCSE’s attempts to locate nonresident parents, establish paternity and orders, and collect support. Because formal child support paid to women currently or previously on TANF or SNAP is kept by the state to recoup welfare costs, low-income fathers and mothers may both prefer informal support to formal support (Roberts and Vinson 2004). However, there is little empirical evidence about how the “chilling effect” has worked to reduce immigrants’ willingness and ability to obtain governmental support. Using the Fragile Families data, Mincy and Nepomnyaschy (2005) found no statistically significant difference between the award probabilities of black and white unmarried parents. The authors also observed lower award probabilities among Hispanic fathers, but no difference in compliance rates between Hispanics and whites. Therefore, the mothers who were not married but were living together with the fathers are included in the analysis of paternity, but excluded from the analysis of the other three outcomes. The legislative index includes laws covering genetic testing, paternity establishment, numerical guidelines, presumptive guidelines, wage withholdings under delinquency, immediate wage withholdings for new cases, universal wage withholdings, and state income tax fund interception (Huang et al  2004). State Welfare Generosity toward NoncitizensThe 1996 Personal Responsibility and Work Reconciliation Act (PRWORA) denied most types of federally funded means-tested assistance to noncitizens who arrived after 1996, and limited the eligibility of many noncitizens already living in the United States. Some states have extended benefits to legal resident noncitizens and others allow access to legal immigrants only after a period of U.S. residency, but none routinely give benefits to unauthorized immigrants.We use the Urban Institute’s index of state generosity toward noncitizens. Anti-Immigrant EnvironmentThere is no readily available measurement for the “chilling effect” of the anti-immigrant environment. There is a wide range of questions on contemporary policy issues, the current election of that year, and party identification and participation, as well as standard demographic and socio-economic status variables. These questions are only available in the FFCWS, and not available in the CPS-CSS, or any other nationally representative datasets. These questions are only available in the FFCWS, and not available in the CPS-CSS, or any other nationally representative datasets. The marginal effects presented should be interpreted as the change in the probability of the dependent variable associated with a discrete change in a binary independent variable and an incremental change in a continuous independent variable, holding all other variables at their means.Since we are using observational data and it is not possible to observe what the child support outcomes would have been if the mixed-status families were citizen families, we have to determine whether what we detect using regression models are the true impact of the immigration status. We conducted sensitivity analysis using the 2001 CPS-CSS because the respondents were facing the same policy environments in terms of child support policy, immigration policy and welfare policy as the respondents of the FFCWS. Descriptive StatisticsTable 3 shows the differences in child support outcomes between mixed-status families and citizen families. As expected, no statistically significant impact of legal status was found on paternity establishment. TANF participation since the focal child’s birth increases mixed-status families’ probability of having a child support order by almost 36 percent, and this impact is statistically significant at the 0.05 level. On the other hand, mothers who are in a steady relationship with the father are less likely to be in the formal child support system, but more likely to receive in-kind support from the father.Institutional factors such as state-level child support enforcement efforts significantly improve formal child support outcomes such as child support order and child support receipt. Fourth, the study makes a methodological contribution by carefully considering the possibility of self-selection in the migration process and its bias associated with observed and unobserved heterogeneity among low-income immigrants. Since mixed-status families have a greater risk of being poor and are less likely to be eligible for federally funded welfare programs such as TANF, SNAP, EITC, or Medicaid, the child support system represents one of the few possibilities that these low-income custodial parents have for obtaining financial support to raise their children. We expect this number to continue rising rapidly given the fertility trend of immigrants in the United States and the decline in marriage rates. Nevertheless, the proportion of families with a formal child support order is low, especially in mixed-status families. First, we did not have detailed immigration status information, so we could not investigate whether undocumented immigrant parents behave differently than legal immigrant parents. In 2011, nearly 41 percent of all births in the United States in 2009 occurred outside marriage, up from 33.2 percent in 2000 and 18.4 percent in 1980 (Martin et al  2011). It is estimated that between 40 and 60 percent of new marriages will eventually end in divorce (Williams, Sawyer et al  2006). Cash assistance now constitutes a substantially smaller share of the income of poor custodial families. In addition, to recoup part of the costs of public benefits, Congress requires the recipients of public assistance to cooperate with efforts to establish paternity. Therefore, the probability of having a child support order is higher for mothers who received TANF or Food Stamps before the child’s birth (Mincy, Garfinkel et al  2005).When a child support order is set, the amount of the order is automatically withheld from the earnings of the noncustodial parent and sent by the employer to a centralized processing agency. 