Elegant studies have demonstrated that this lipid plays an essential role in sorting events, such as the inclusion of activated EGF receptors within MVBs (Petiot et al , 2003), rather than bulk transport of cargo through the endosomal system. The first of these are the large, swollen structures that are easily visible under phase contrast. The second vesicular population is smaller in diameter and more difficult to observe under phase contrast. Supporting such a conclusion, conditions of PIKfyve suppression that induce the formation of large, swollen late endosomal structures, do not result in a detectable defect in the endosomal sorting and degradation of internalised EGF receptor or the endosomal recycling of transferrin receptor. The CD8 antibody used for decorating the CD8-chimeras was the mouse monoclonal UCHT4 (Ancell, Bayport, Minnesota), it was illuminated by an Alexa Fluor 488-conjugated anti-mouse antibody (Invitrogen, Paisley, UK). The trans-Golgi network was stained using a sheep anti-TGN46 antibody (Serotec, Oxford, UK), followed by staining with an Alexa Fluor 568-conjugated anti-sheep antibody (Invitrogen). Cells were incubated for a further 72 hours. Cells were placed on ice and cell-surface bound 125I-transferrin was stripped off using ice-cold 0.2 M acetic acid, 0.5 M NaCl, pH 4.5 for 2 minutes, then washed extensively with ice-cold PBS. At the end of each time point, medium was removed and separated into acid-precipitable material (recycled counts) and acid-soluble material (degraded counts) by incubation with 3% trichloroacetic acid, 0.3% phosphotungstic acid for 30 minutes at 4°C followed by high-speed centrifugation. Consistent with this, a number of studies have identified various proteins known to be involved in MVB sorting, including mVps24, Ent3p and Ent5p, as potential PtdIns(3,5)P2 effectors (Friant et al , 2003; Whitley et al , 2003; Eugster et al , 2004; Michell et al , 2006). Counts present in each fraction were determined by counting γ-radiation. Recycled counts were determined by summing acid-precipitable counts and counts removed by the acetic acid strip. Anti-CD8 uptake experimentsThe uptake experiments were performed as previously described (Carlton et al , 2005). Degree of colocalisation was measured using Metamorph software (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA) by acquiring the area of CD8- and TGN46-staining and measuring the percentage of CD8-positive area included in the TGN46-positive area. Whereas Vac14p is required for proper degradative traffic (Dove et al , 2002), Vac7p is required for correct retrograde vacuole-to-TGN traffic (Bonangelino et al , 1997), suggesting that Vac7p-dependent PtdIns(3,5)P2 production is required for this retrieval step. Further evidence in favour of a role for PtdIns(3,5)P2 in vacuole-to-Golgi retrieval has stemmed from the characterisation of Svp1p (Atg18p) (Dove et al , 2004). Supporting this, WIPI49, a mammalian orthologue of Svp1p (Dove et al , 2004), controls endosome-to-TGN retrieval of the CI-MPR (Jeffries et al , 2004). Consistent with previous data (Sbrissa et al , 2002), association with these punctae was dependent upon phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI 3-kinase) activity, because incubation with wortmannin (100 nM for 10 minutes) resulted in dissociation of GFP-PIKfyve into the cytosol (supplementary material Fig. 1C, Table 1, and data not shown). Cells were imaged at one frame per second over a 10-minute period. A similar level of suppression was observed with siRNA duplex V (data not shown), whereas the remaining siRNAs gave much lower levels of suppression (Fig. 