This statistic sums over the overlaps (products) of BCR sequence read counts, scaled by a measure of the diversity within each sample: 1 as completely different and 0 as identical. Within the IgM+IgD+ repertoire the most highly abundant BCRs were shared among all replicates, while the BCRs that were highest in the IgM−IgD− repertoire were more variable and most were expressed in only one or two mice, confirming the analysis with the Morisita-Horn index (Fig. While we found a slight increase in the proportion of BCRs containing a single mutation in the switched repertoire (up to 4.2% from 0.1%), we did not observe signs of accumulated somatic hypermutation (Fig. As a further confirmation, we analyzed full-length BCR sequences of light chains cloned from the IgM+IgD+ and IgM−IgD− repertoires (60 sequences from each repertoire). This could be due to a unique aspartic acid residue in CDR1, which is negatively charged and might counteract the arginine residues. Clearly these peptides are not acquired through internalization of autoreactive BCRs. Clearly these peptides are not acquired through internalization of autoreactive BCRs. The IgG cytoplasmic tails contain a conserved YXXM amino acid motif that functions as an internalization signal for antigen processing and presentation. Using transgenic mice expressing antigen-specific IgM, IgG or a chimeric IgM with the IgG cytoplasmic tail, Martin and Goodnow showed that the IgG tail greatly enhanced the survival of progeny cells, leading to expanded numbers(Martin and Goodnow, 2002). Total RNA was isolated from thymic B cells using the RNA microprep kit (Zymo Research). Total RNA was isolated from thymic B cells using the RNA microprep kit (Zymo Research). cDNA was synthesized with ProtoScript® II reverse transcriptase (NEB) by using 250ng of total RNA and poly d(T)18. 2 μl of the 1st round PCR product was used as the template for the 2nd round PCR. 2 μl of the 1st round PCR product was used as the template for the 2nd round PCR. The first round was amplified for 10 cycles, after which, this product was used to prime a 2nd round PCR with primers to add the required adapters and barcodes for the Illumina platform. PCR products were gel purified, mixed at equimolar ratios, and submitted to University of Chicago Functional Genomics Facility for quality control and sequencing on the Illumina HiSeq (1×150bp). Only unique V-J-CDR3 amino acid combinations that comprised at least 0.1% of the total counts in any sample were included in the principal components analysis (PCA). Following cloning and full length sequence confirmation, light chains matching V-J-CDR3 combinations of interest were co-transfected alongside the 3H9 heavy chain in 293A cells for expression. Images were acquired using a Leica DMRB on the 63x oil objective at room temperature using a Qimaging Retiga 2000R camera with Q Capture Pro software. Images were acquired using a Leica DMRB on the 63x oil objective at room temperature using a Qimaging Retiga 2000R camera with Q Capture Pro software. Antigens that are bound by the BCR are internalized and presented much more efficiently than by other APCs (reviewed in (Lanzavecchia, 1990; Yuseff et al , 2013)). Antigens that are bound by the BCR are internalized and presented much more efficiently than by other APCs (reviewed in (Lanzavecchia, 1990; Yuseff et al , 2013)). WT thymic class-switched B cells in AID−/− mice after joining with a WT partner could be due to two possible events: 1) unswitched WT B cells recirculates to the thymus of AID−/− partner and class switch intrathymically; 2) WT pre-existing class-switched B cells recirculate to the thymus of AID−/− partner. The 3H9 transgenic mice exhibit excellent heavy chain allelic exclusion, and the contribution of endogenous light chains to 3H9 binding specificities is well characterized, facilitating analysis of alterations in polyclonal repertoire. Our sequencing covered broad a range of Igκ families, although certain Igκ families (Vκ2, Vκ11, Vκ13, Vκ11) were under-represented due to mismatches of the PCR forward primer with these particular V genes. 