In the most proximal events of TGF-β signaling, TGF-β binds to TGF-βRI, which results in phosphorylation of TGF-βRII and the formation of a tetrameric complex consisting of two subunits each of TGF-βRI and TGF-βRII. Although these findings suggest that PECAM-1 ITIM phosphorylation and SHP-2 recruitment require TGF-βRI/II-mediated phosphorylation events, it is unlikely that the PECAM-1 ITIMs are directly phosphorylated by TGF-βRI/II. The two most membrane-distal Ig domains of PECAM-1 support homophilic interactions that facilitate maintenance of endothelial barrier integrity and leukocyte trans-endothelial migration (11). Phosphorylation of the cytoplasmic ITIMs of PECAM-1 depends upon a series of serine and threonine (S/T) and tyrosine (Y) phosphorylation events that support the recruitment and activation of tandem Src homology 2 (SH2) domain-containing phosphatases, such as SHP-2 (15, 16). Homozygosity for the disrupted PECAM1 allele was confirmed for all mice by performing a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay with tail DNA using a forward primer that hybridizes with a sequence within exon 7 (5′-CTGCCAGTCCGAAAATGGAAC-3′) and reverse primers that hybridize with either a sequence within the neomycin cassette (5′-TGCTCCTGCCGAGAAAGTATCC-3′), which amplifies a 626-bp band from the disrupted allele, or a sequence within intron 7 (5′-GGTCAAAAAGGGTTACAACGGC-3′), which amplifies a 387-bp band from the wild-type (WT) allele and a 1546-bp band from the disupted allele. Flow cytometry was used to measure the extent of CFSE dilution and intracellular staining of granzyme B with a phycoerythrin (PE)-conjugated anti-granzyme B antibody, clone GB11 (Invitrogen/Life Technologies). Flow cytometry was used to measure the extent of CFSE dilution and for intracellular staining of granzyme B as described earlier. After 24 hours at 37°C, the medium was removed and replaced with viral supernatant (3.62 × 108 transduction units/ml) containing polybrene (Santa Cruz) at a final concentration of 4 μg/ml. Pre-cleared lysates were incubated with 0.2 to 2 μg of PECAM-1.2 or PECAM-1.3 mAb for 1 hour at 4°C followed by incubation with 20 μl of Protein A/G Plus-Agarose beads overnight at 4°C. Membranes were blocked in 3% non-fat milk and 1× Tris buffered saline, 0.1% Tween-20 (TBST) at room temperature for 1 hour, and incubated with primary antibodies in blocking buffer overnight at 4°C. Membranes were washed three times for 5 min each with 1× TBST, incubated with horse radish peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated secondary antibodies in blocking buffer for 1 hour at room temperature, and then washed three times for 10 min each with 1× TBST. After the blocking buffer was drained off the slides, 100 μl of appropriately diluted primary antibody (1:100 in 0.5% BSA in PBS) was added to slide sections and incubated in a humidified chamber at room temperature for 2 hours. The slides were rinsed twice in PBS, then incubated with 100 μl of diluted secondary antibody (1:200ul in PBS) in a humidified chamber at room temperature for 1 hour. Slides were rinsed twice in PBS before 100 μl of 28.6 μM of 4′,6-diamidino-2phenylindole dihydrochloride (DAPI, Sigma-Aldrich) in PBS was added to each well of the slides. The soaking buffer was removed, the slides were incubated with Duolink Ligase diluted in ligation buffer for 30 min at 37°C and then were washed three times with TBST. Also similar to mouse CD8+ T cells, lower concentrations of TGF-β were required to inhibit IFN-γ production (Fig. 3, E and F) were greater than those required to inhibit these functions in PECAM-1-positive cells. Secretion of large amounts of TGF-β helps tumors evade clearance by tumor-reactive T cells, and tumors that secrete large amounts of TGF-β have proven resistant to immune checkpoint therapy (7, 8). 