These defects were apparent in H&E stained transverse sections of the heads at multiple levels (Fig. We observed similar brain vessel distribution in the WT and flox/flox mutants at E9.5 (data not shown), however, at E10.5, we noted evidence of clearing of telancephalic vessels in the WT (Fig. 4C-b,d).Transverse sections of the PECAM stained brains at the level of the nasal-mandibullar processes showed histologic evidence of clearing of vessels in the WT heads (Fig. In this study, we determined whether VSMC-deletion of Bmpr1a could cause abnormalities in vasculogenesis that might explain a propensity to PAH. 4C-k) (*P<0.05).Since pericytes express SM22α (Ding et al , 2004), we speculated that loss of Bmpr1a in these cells led to resistance to apoptosis and reduced clearing of brain microvessels. We then used RNAi to reduce mRNA levels of MMP-2 in HBVP and confirmed the decrease in pro and active forms of MMP-2 by gelatin zymography (P<0.001) (Fig. Bmp10-null mice also develop hearts with hypoplastic walls owing to reduced proliferation of cardiomycocytes at E9.0-E9.5 (Chen et al , 2004). Dilatation of the aorta was observed in embryos with FLK1-Bmpr1a deletion (FLK1-Cre;Bmpr1aflox/flox) (Park et al , 2006) and in Alk1 (Oh et al , 2000) and Smad5 (Yang et al , 1999) null embryos. Since FLK1 is a mesodermal marker and Alk1 is mostly expressed in EC, the angiogenic defect in the yolk sac is likely due to the loss of Bmpr1a in EC, a feature we reproduced by ablating Bmpr1a using Tie2-Cre (our unpublished observations). F2 breeding was then realized by backcrossing F1 mice (SM22α-Cre;R26R+/-;Bmpr1aflox/+) with the Bmpr1aflox/flox;R26R+/+ mice to produce mice that are SM22α-Cre;R26R;Bmpr1aflox/flox (flox/flox). Indeed, we showed that lack of Bmpr1a or MMP-2 by RNAi renders pericytes in culture resistant to apoptosis.The same phenomenon might explain the enhanced ramification of the interlimb vessels seen in the flox/flox mutants suggesting that vascular deletion of Bmpr1a might impair organogenesis of other tissues not investigated. To assess apoptosis, we performed the Terminal Deoxynucleotidyl Transferase Biotin-dUTP Nick End-Labeling (TUNEL) assay using the ApopTag Peroxidase In Situ Oligo Ligation Apoptosis Detection Kit (Chemicon International, Temecula, CA, S7200). The gelatinolytic activities were detected as transparent bands against the background of Coomassie brilliant blue-stained gelatin and quantified using ImageJ. Statistical AnalysisValues for each determination are expressed as mean±s.e.m.. For comparisons made to assess two groups, statistical significance was determined using the unpaired two-tailed t-Test. Cre activity was evident in the heart from E8.5 (data not shown) by blue LacZ staining and in the heart and vasculature at E9.25 (Fig. 1C-d vs. WT in c), and at E11, the mice showed massive perivascular and pericardial hemorrhage (Fig. Our results showed no difference in immunoreactivity between mutant (Fig. Figure 3A also showed more ramifications or interconnections in the interlimb vessels of the flox/flox (e) vs. WT (f) embryos. 