For example, in depressed subjects, treatment with drugs that target either serotonergic or noradrenergic neurotransmission may be equally efficacious at distal time points, but they differ in the initial response time and in the pattern of behavioral improvement (Katz et al  2004). Effect of antidepressants on FR-2 shuttle box escape deficitsTo determine if antidepressants could reverse the shuttle box escape deficit induced by a single IS session, and to compare the effects of two different pharmacological classes of antidepressants, animals were administered SAL, DMI (24 mg/kg/day) or FLX (5 mg/kg/day) for 6 days after IS, and subsequently subjected to a shuttle box test session (experiment 3). Consequently, additional models that reproduce both the pattern of behavioral changes and the temporal course observed clinically may allow for improved characterization of the therapeutically relevant neuroplastic changes associated with chronic exposure to distinct pharmacological classes (Katz et al  2006). The series of stressors in the CUS procedure did not include electrical shocks, exposures to shock grids or to the IS context. Because it has previously been shown that the 5HT1A agonist 8-OH-DPAT both blocked the development of and reversed FR-2 shuttle box escape deficits when IS was performed in a context different from the shuttle box, but had no effect when IS was administered in the shuttle box used for testing (Maier and Watkins 2005), it is tempting to speculate that the differential activity of FLX on our IS and CUS-induced escape deficit is due to a contextual fear effect. These findings, combined with the absence of an effect of CTP in our model using doses that are behaviorally active in other stress paradigms (Overstreet et al  2004; Papp et al  2002), supports the possibility that the strong effect of DMI and the absence of an effect of FLX and CTP at the first shuttle box test session is not a dose response limitation, but reflects differential neural modulation by noradrenergic and serotonergic antidepressants. This approach may be particularly relevant for assessing the behavioral and cellular mechanisms underlying the ineffectiveness of SSRI’s in treatment refractory conditions and help guide the development of novel treatments based on selective pharmacological targeting of different symptom clusters within stress-induced psychiatric disorders (Frazer and Morilak 2005). Animals were allowed 7–10 days to habituate to housing conditions before experiments began. Animals were pair-housed in suspended, wire bottom cages under a 12/12-h light–dark cycle with continuous access to food and water in a temperature (25°C) and humidity controlled environment. The provision of food required sliding open the cages to refill stainless steel slotted troughs. Routine cage maintenance consisted of removing trays that collected debris filtering through the cage floor. Routine cage maintenance consisted of removing trays that collected debris filtering through the cage floor. Each chamber consisted of plexiglass walls and a metal grid floor with a grid spacing of 1.5 cm. Crosses were automatically scored by the PC whenever a micro-switch was activated by tilting of the pivoted grid floor after a crossing event. 3).Experiment 4To assess the duration of the shuttle box escape deficit induced by a single IS session, rats were randomly assigned to three groups that were tested at either 6, 12 or 21 days after the initial IS session (n=7–8 per group, Fig. Commonly used preclinical procedures, such as learned helplessness (LH) and the forced swim test (FST), generally fail to model this ‘therapeutic lag’ and may not be suitable for characterizing the delayed molecular and cellular alterations in neural plasticity associated with chronic drug treatment (Frazer and Morilak 2005). For experiments with two groups, the primary analysis consisted of an unpaired Student’s t-test. 