Prior to the introduction of the NDNAD, DNA profiling in the UK was largely confined to use in the investigation of serious crime. The story of Samuels’ detection is an example of the central idea which has fuelled the development of the NDNAD as an instrument of reconstructive surveillance. Crime scene collection has been aided by the employment of more scene examiners and a vast increase in budget allocation for these personnel costs. Although the tactics and applications of the NDNAD are contemporary they are being applied to problems informed by much older ideas and much older rhetorical figures. The aim of the NDNAD is to capture this group of offenders within its closed circuit archive in order to assure future detection. At present anyone can be included on this list of suspects once arrested for any recordable offence. Approximately 300,000 persons every year are arrested but not subsequently charged and are now included on the NDNAD. Rose has argued that a new ‘game of power’, introduced in advanced liberal states as a ‘community-civility game’ (1999: 188), has contributed to the redefinition of the broadest questions about the social control of those deemed in need of governance by those authorized to govern. In this sense, the use of the NDNAD is not aimed at the ‘correction’ of offenders but at delimiting them from the wider population and managing them through assured detection. In addition, a series of more detailed enquires have examined the adoption and adaptation by modern states of a series of scientific and technological supports for corroborating the identities of present subjects and inferring the identities of absent ones. Foucault’s work has already been widely applied to suggest how surveillance technologies work upon, and through, the social body – producing both the docility of disciplinary subjection (as outlined in Foucault, 1977) and self referential forms of conduct (as expressed in Foucault, 1988; 1990). In developing our own perspective we agree with Valier that there are important differences between the ‘reconstructive perspective of criminal detection’ (Valier 2001: 428) and the ‘future oriented practices’ (Valier 2001: 427) that drive contemporary forms of visual and transactional surveillance. It is part of the argument of this paper that this distinction overlooks the multidimensional character of the technical and organisational differences and overlaps amongst the various forms of detection and surveillance used by government and commercial agencies in contemporary society. Panoptic power may be somewhat fictitious - for Foucault it operates by inducing in subjects a mode of subjection which is built on the potential for permanent observation rather than the permanence itself -but such tactics of surveillance are nevertheless employed in contemporary society in a vast number of different ways. It is clear that both types of instrumentalities of surveillance may be used to witness or reconstruct particular human actions and to identify specific human subjects. However, each of these two types of surveillance may be further differentiated by whether or not each variant within the types draw upon pre-existing archived information to support the achievement of recognitions and identifications in practice. Others have followed this lead in order to reveal the variety of ways in which the work of visualisation is shaped by and in turn shapes scientific practice in a number of different disciplinary and historical contexts (see for example: Lynch and Woolgar, 1990; Tufte 1990 and 1997; Valier 2001). In the UK at the time of writing, this test is likely to the Kastle-Meyer test which uses the acid-based indicator phenolphthalin, colourless in an alkaline solution but which is oxidised by peroxide in the presence of haemoglobin into phenolphthalein and so turns bright pink. 