Experimental procedures to analyze implantation sites are provided in the Supplemental Information. TSC CultureCells were maintained in a proliferative state in media (TSC media) containing 70% embryonic mouse fibroblast-cell-conditioned medium, 30% TSC medium, 25 ng/ml FGF4, and 1 μg/ml heparin, incubated in a humidified tissue culture incubator at 37°C saturated with 5% CO2 in air (Sun et al , 2010). Nonetheless, most investigators believed that LE cells enclosing the blastocyst have characteristics of apoptosis, including cellular shrinkage and nuclear fragmentation following implantation on day 5 (Parr et al , 1987; Welsh and Enders, 1993). Cell Tracker AssaysCell tracker assays were performed as previously described (Overholtzer et al , 2007) and are detailed in the Supplemental Information. Removal of LE Cells in Direct Contact with the Trophoblast Cells Is Independent of Caspase 3 ActivationPrevious studies have suggested that maternal responses to implantation prompt LE cells in the implantation chamber to undergo apoptosis and that cell corpses are then endocytosed by trophoblast cells (Parr et al , 1987; Welsh and Enders, 1993). Cells undergoing apoptosis ultimately show DNA fragmentation, which can be detected by the TUNEL assay (Negoescu et al , 1996). We found that the engulfed LE cells are encircled by LAMP1, suggesting that the engulfed cell is within a lysosome (white arrow head in Figure 3C).Previous studies have shown that neutrophils and monocytes are present close to the implantation chamber at the beginning of implantation (McMaster et al , 1993). Similar to earlier evidence that MCF7 cells can engulf live cells by entosis (Overholtzer et al , 2007), we also observed internalization of LE cells within trophoblast cells, supporting our hypothesis that trophoblast cells remove the surrounding LE cell barrier by entosis during implantation, and this on-time elimination of the LE barrier is critical to normal implantation. To make the in vitro condition closer to a physiological setting, we repeated the experiments by replacing TSCs with blastocysts, which were collected by flushing uteri from Rosa-Tomato reporter mice on day 4 of pregnancy. Inhibition of ROCK Impedes the Process of Entosis during ImplantationThere is evidence that small GTPase ROCK is required for entosis (Overholtzer et al , 2007). 