Overall, the observational studies in this review have included relevant outcomes but are subject to biases from residual confounding and measurement error (e.g. Also, many of these studies assume that outcomes are consistent regardless of the type of antihypertensive deprescribed, which is unlikely given that antihypertensives are used for various other CV and renal indications. Notably, no antihypertensive deprescribing studies used an active comparator (i.e., deprescribing of another class of drugs not expected to affect the outcome of interest) and negative outcome control to help reduce bias, such as increased surveillance for medication-related problems or confounding by indication [38,39]. Randomized Controlled Trials (RCTs)Table 1 provides a summary of recent RCTs testing hypertension management approaches in older patients, with varying generalizability to NH residents.RCTs Comparing More Intensive vs. Less Intensive Control/BP TargetsA systematic review of past RCTs showed insufficient evidence to support more intensive control over higher BP targets among older adults [27]. Clearly, there is a lack of RCTs powered to detect patient-centered outcomes (i.e., recurrent stroke with sub-analyses of stroke type, cognitive function) and representative of older adults in NH with a history of stroke and stroke-related cognitive impairment.RCTs Comparing Deprescribing of Antihypertensives vs. No DeprescribingOther RCTs (bottom of Table 1) have focused on interventions to de-intensify antihypertensive medications (i.e., “deprescribing” interventions) in patients with characteristics reflective of typical NH populations, including both patients with diagnosis of hypertension as well as patients with other CV indications for antihypertensive treatment. These deprescribing RCTs mainly assessed the impact of interventions to de-intensify antihypertensive medications on process measures such as number of antihypertensives and changes in BP, and less often examined patient-centered outcomes (e.g., CV events, mortality, adverse drug events). Compared to usual care, deprescribing rates were higher in the deprescribing intervention group, with no significant differences in secondary outcomes of changes in pulse or SBP among those deprescribed. Another study included Medicare beneficiaries in NHs and assessed the association between number of antihypertensives and CV and non-CV outcomes, stratified by diagnosis of dementia [8]. The Health ABC cohort study did not find an association between use of antihypertensives (measured by participant interview) with recurrent falls in the following year [42]. 