3B shows that transfections of pGL3-TRAIL2 containing a 504 bp fragment upstream of translational start site results in an approximately 2.5-fold increase in luciferase activity in response to MS275 treatment, as compared to untreated cells. Interestingly, we did not detect the changes in the levels of Sp1 protein in response to the treatments (Fig. 6C shows that cells transfected with Sp1 siRNA are more resistant to MS275, adriamycin or in combination, as compared to cells transfected with control siRNA, which is similar to the results obtained with cells in which TRAIL was down regulated (Fig. To overcome this difficulty, we examined the role of Sp1 in chemosensitivity using Sp1 knockout mouse ES cells. The histone-deacetylase inhibitors (HDACIs) are novel anticancer agents that can activate transcription of target genes via histone acetylation (24). It has been shown that protein modifications including phosphorylation by anticancer agents increase Sp1 transcription activity (40). In addition, it has been shown that HDAC1 could interact with Sp1 to regulate its activity (42). Since there are several HDAC family members, it is possible that MS275 could affect other HDAC members to regulate Sp1 activity. More importantly, we demonstrate that Sp1-dependent TRAIL induction plays a critical role in cell death induced by combined treatments with MS275 and adriamycin because down-regulation of TRAIL by siRNA in T47D or deletion of Sp1 in Sp1 knockout mouse ES cells abolishes such sensitization. Monoclonal anti-human TRAIL, DR4, and polyclonal DR5 antibodies were purchased from Imgenex (San Diego, CA). Rabbit anti-caspase-9, -8, -3, and anti-poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) polyclonal antibodies were purchased from Cell Signaling Technology (Beverly, MA). Monoclonal p21 antibody was purchased from Calbiochem (San Diego, CA). Anti-actin antibody was purchased from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). Sp1 antibody was purchased from Upstate Biotechnology (Lake Placid, NY). Isolation of RNA and Northern blot analysisThe procedures for preparation of total RNA and Northern blot analysis were described previously (31). The transfection was performed as suggested by Dharmacon with slight modifications, as described previously (32). The transfection was performed as suggested by Dharmacon with slight modifications, as described previously (32). MTT assaysMTT assays were described previously (33). MTT assaysMTT assays were described previously (33). Construction of reporter vectorsTRAIL reporter constructs pGL3-TRAIL2, pGL3-TRAIL5 and pGL3-TRAIL6 were described previously (33) and shown in Fig. Thus, both TRAIL-R3 and TRAIL-R4 act as decoy receptors to antagonize TRAIL-induced apoptosis by competing for ligand binding (14, 15). Luciferase reporter assaysTransfections for luciferase assays were carried out as described previously (33). Chromatin Immunoprecipitation (ChIP)ChIP was performed using the ChIP Assay Kit (Upstate Biotechnology) as described previously (33). The PCR primers used in ChIP were 5′-AATGGGCTTGAGGTGAGTGCAGAT-3′ and 5′-ATGAGTTGTTTTTCTGGGTTCTGT-3′. Nuclear protein was then quantified using the Bio-Rad Protein Assay kit (Bio-Rad). 