1A) the threshold, peak amplitude, full width at half maximum of the first and last APs of the train, amplitude of spike afterhyperpolarization (AHP) and decay times at 25, 50 and 75% of AHP amplitude after the first and last AP. For example, a bursting pattern would result in very different minimum and maximum ISI values and as a consequence a large CV of the ISI distribution. Dissimilarities in individual spike shape, spike frequency adaptation and AP amplitude accommodation are also reflected by our measurements. We also tested whether the measured and calculated parameters depended on the amount of injected current to evoke the spike trains. Statistical comparisons revealed that (i) the threshold of the first AP (cluster 1, −36.1 ± 3.7 mV vs. cluster 2, −33.3 ± 4.9 mV; Fig. Cells belonging to cluster 2 displayed very different spike frequency adaptations (Figs 3B and 4D), amplitude and time course of AHP (Figs 3B and 4A) or τ (Fig. To reduce the number of dimensions within which clustering was carried out, we performed PCA of the 18 anatomical parameters. 6A indicates that four factors had eigenvalues > 1, accounting for > 73% of the total variance. 6A indicates that four factors had eigenvalues > 1, accounting for > 73% of the total variance. PCA indicated seven factors with eigenvalues of > 1 (Fig. However, a very close agreement between the results of clustering based on all parameters and only the physiological parameters was also observed. Our results demonstrate the presence of two subpopulations of ETCs of the rat MOB based on their active and passive intrinsic electrical properties and their dendritic morphologies. Over 30 electrophysiological and 18 morphological parameters were measured and calculated for > 60 randomly selected ETCs. Most notably, they reported only burst firing behaviours irrespective of whether spontaneous activity was monitored in cell-attached mode or firing was evoked by current injections in the whole-cell configuration. Despite the different names, their functional roles could be very similar in olfactory processing. After an additional 30–60-min period of recovery at 33 °C, slices were incubated at room temperature until they were transferred to the recording chamber. Cells were recorded with a potassium gluconate-based intracellular solution (containing, in mm: K-gluconate, 120; KCl, 5; MgCl2, 2; EGTA, 0.05; HEPES, 10; Mg-ATP, 2; Mg-GTP, 0.4; creatinine phosphate, 10; and biocytin, 5.3–8; pH 7.25, osmolarity 270–290 mOsm). Data were digitized on-line at 10 or 20 kHz, and analysed with EVAN 1.3 (Nusser et al , 2001) and with an in-house analysis software (SPIN 1.0.1) written in Matlab (Matlab 7.0; The MathWorks Inc., Natick, MA, USA). All measured physiological parameters are listed in Table 1. Recorded cells: visualization and reconstructionAfter recordings, slices were placed in a fixative containing 4% paraformaldehyde, 1.25% glutaraldehyde and 15 v/v% picric acid in 0.1 m phosphate buffer (PB; pH 7.4) at 4 °C. After several washes in PB, slices were embedded in gelatin and re-sectioned at 60 μm thickness. Biocytin was visualized using avidin–biotin–horseradish peroxidase complex (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA) followed by a reaction with 3′3-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (0.05% solution in Tris buffer, pH 7.4) as chromogen and 0.01% H2O2 as oxidant for 12 min. PCA (Joliffe & Morgan, 1992) and agglomerative clustering methods were carried out with Statistica 6.0 (StatSoft, Inc., Tulsa, OK, USA). Only factors with large eigenvalue (usually > 1) are selected to represent the population. Only factors with large eigenvalue (usually > 1) are selected to represent the population. Then the reverse comparison was carried out (members of clusters 1 and 2 from the centre of cluster 2; Figs 2E, 6E and 9D). Subsequently, a similar statistical comparison was carried out with three clusters, four clusters, etc. Subsequently, a similar statistical comparison was carried out with three clusters, four clusters, etc. 