While genetic variation in IFIH1 has previously been shown to influence susceptibility to several autoimmune diseases such as type I diabetes, Graves’ disease, and multiple sclerosis [18-20, 27-32], this is the first report of polymorphisms in IFIH1 linked to a fungal infection. MDA5 activates the RLR pathway leading to the production of type I interferons during viral infections [26]. A recent study showed that rare IFIH1 variants causing the type I interferon-mediated pathology of the Aicardi-Goutières syndrome are gain of function mutations that lead to stronger RNA binding, and thereby increase baseline and RNA-induced IFN signaling [41]. This is the first time that a receptor of the RIG-I-like helicase family has been shown to be involved in the antifungal immune response. Controls were recruited consecutively from the same hospital wards/services as infected patients during the study period, with a similar balance of medical, surgical, and oncology patients in case and control groups. We applied quality control filters to exclude SNPs with: (i) a genotype call rate of less than 90%, (ii) strong deviation from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium in control samples (Hardy-Weinberg exact test P ≤ 1 × 10−3), and (iii) significant differences in missingness between cases and controls (Fisher's exact P < 1 × 10−2). As our cohort does not have the power to detect associations with rare variants, we only included SNPs with a minor allele frequency (MAF) of greater than 5% in cases and controls together. Genetic analysesLinkage disequilibrium (LD) measures were calculated using Haploview version 4.2 [51] for both the candidemia cohort (LD patterns are based on genotypes of control individuals only) and common SNPs (MAF > 5%) in the CEU population (Utah Residents (CEPH) with Northern and Western European ancestry) in HapMap 3, release 2 [52]. Genotypic association was calculated using the Fisher's exact test, asking whether candidemia cases and controls have significantly different genotype count distributions (H0: genotype counts are the same). Similarly, allelic association was calculated using the Fisher's exact test, asking whether candidemia cases and controls have significantly different allele count distributions (H0: allele counts are the same). Mda5 knockout mice studiesMda5−/− mice on C57BL/6J background that have been backcrossed at least ten times (kindly provided by dr. M. Colonna) were housed in the facilities of the University Hospital Bonn, Germany. IFIH1 (interferon induced with helicase C domain 1), with its protein product known as MDA5 (melanoma differentiation-associated protein 5), is a receptor of long double-stranded RNA (dsRNA), which constitutes one branch of the RLR pathway (Figure 1B). ISG15 and TRIM25 were not covered, and genetic variation linked to IL8 did not reveal any association.In contrast, analysis of 64 SNPs associated with IFIH1 revealed strong allelic and genotypic association with susceptibility to candidemia (Figure 2A and Table 2). 