Oncogenic signaling promoted synthesis of negative regulators, such as DUSPs and SPRY proteins, but many of these act upstream of BRAF, making negative feedback more effective against the physiological than oncogenic configuration. Experiments confirmed these predictions, which could be recapitulated with three growth factors other than EGF (Figure 5G) and with trametinib plus dabrafenib (Figure S3D). When the oncogenic configuration is inhibited, negative feedback on receptors is relieved. It might therefore seem logical to target growth factors to improve therapeutic response. We propose that persistence in drug-adapted melanoma cells and primary resistance in cancers expressing abundant RTKs (e.g., EGFR in colorectal cancers) differ primarily in the duration of ERK activation: sporadic pulsing is sufficient for persistence but chronic or frequent signaling is necessary for tumor growth.In our studies, spontaneous ERK pulses likely arise from localized release of growth factors enhanced by non-uniform distribution of RTKs at a single-cell level (Shaffer et al , 2017; Spencer et al , 2009). Our computational model shows that multiple biochemical mechanisms, including the resistance of RAF dimers downstream of RTKs to RAF inhibitors, the ability of MEK inhibitors to block MEK phosphorylation by monomeric BRAFV600E, but not dimeric RAF, and the higher affinity of MEK inhibitors for unphosphorylated MEK are all involved in creating a wide dose range over which combined RAF and MEK inhibitors suppress oncogenic signaling but potentiate receptor-driven ERK pulsing (the physiological configuration in Figure 7B).Could new drugs or drug combinations be deployed to block pulsatile MAPK signaling and the emergence of persister cells? Animals in the second group were given equivalent volumes of OG and IP vehicle controls (VV control group). Animals in the second group were given equivalent volumes of OG and IP vehicle controls (VV control group). Animals in the second group were given equivalent volumes of OG and IP vehicle controls (VV control group). Tumor volume was calculated from daily measurements by caliper (see Figure S5A). After 5 days, mice were transcardially perfused with oxygenated and heparinized Tyrode’s solution which allowed for simultaneous euthanasia and exsanguination. Flank xenografts were then surgically removed and fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) in PBS and stored at 4 °C for 48 h. All fixed tumors from a single group were uniformly paraffin embedded into a single block holder and sectioned in 5 μM slices.Xenograft for Live-Cell Intravital ImagingAll animal research was performed in accordance with guidelines from the Institutional Subcommittee on Research Animal Care, and studies related to intravital microscopy were performed under approval of the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) at Massachusetts General Hospital. Window chambers were sealed with sterile coverslips, and mice were supplied prophylactically with drinking water containing antibiotics. The performance of A375_a in overexpressing endogenous genes was evaluated by individually targeting 3 control genes (CDKN1C, SLC4A1, POU5F1) and measuring gene expression changes by RT-qPCR (dataset provided in Synapse database, see Table S4 and Data availability). CRISPRi and CRISPRa A375 Cell Lines Targeting EGFRPairs of complementary synthetic oligonucleotides (Integrated DNA Technologies) forming sgRNA protospacers flanked by BstXI and BlpI restriction sites were annealed and ligated into BstXI/BlpI double digested plasmid pU6-sgRNA EF1Alpha-puro-T2A-BFP (Addgene #60955). Reactions were diluted four-fold with water and qPCR was performed in 10 μL reactions in 384-well plates using PowerUp SYBR Green PCR Master mix (ThermoFisher Scientific), 2 μL of diluted cDNA preparation, and 0.4 μM of primers using a QuantStudio 6 real-time PCR system (Applied Biosystems). All qPCR primers are listed in the dataset provided in Synapse database, see Table S4 and Data availability. Log2 fold changes in expression were then determined by the difference between the ΔCt value of targeting sgRNAs and that of a non-targeting negative control sgRNA (A375_iNC or A375_aNC) (ΔΔCt). A similar phenomenon was observed in five A375 cultures that had been subjected to single-cell cloning (Figures 1B and S1A). Samples were subjected to three rounds of photochemical bleaching, then stained with Hoechst 33342 (2 μg/mL) in OBB and antibodies against p-ERK (1:200, Cell Signaling Technologies, Cat. We generated whole tumor images from image tiles using Ashlar, a software tool that performs simultaneous stitching and registration of cyclic microscopy images of large tissue sections (https://github.com/labsyspharm/ashlar). In treated subjects, 25 mg/kg dabrafenib and 2.5 mg/kg trametinib (both from LC labs) were given by oral gavage in water with 1% DMSO and 0.5% methylcellulose, 48 hr and again 24 hr prior to the imaging session. HRP was detected using ECL substrate purchased from Thermo Scientific (#34076) using a myECL Imager, and signals were quantified using the Image Studio Lite software (LI-COR Biosciences) by normalizing the specific signal for each sample to the Actin signal. For Met, EGFR, Her2 and Her3, capture antibodies (MAB3581, AF231, MAB1129, and MAB3481, respectively), biotinylated detection antibodies (BAF358, BAF231, BAF1129, and BAM348, respectively) and recombinant proteins used for quantification (8614-MT, 344-ER, 1129-ER, and 348-RB respectively) were from R&D systems. Streptavidin Phycoerythrin (SAPE) was from Biorad (#171304501).Capture antibody conjugated beads were generated by incubation of MagPix beads (Luminex Corp.) with 5 mg/mL EDC (N-(3-dime-thylaminopropyl)-N’-ethylcarbodiimide, Sigma) and 5 mg/mL S-NHS (N-hydroxysulfosuccinimide, Pierce) in 80mM NaH2PO4 pH 6.3 for 20 min in the dark at RT. Time lapse imaging was performed in DMEM without phenol red with 4.5 g/l glucose, L-glutamine, and sodium pyruvate (Corning) and supplemented with 5% FBS. We speculate that the ERK:KTR reporter can be activated in S/G2 phases by a CDK (e.g. We speculate that the ERK:KTR reporter can be activated in S/G2 phases by a CDK (e.g. We speculate that the ERK:KTR reporter can be activated in S/G2 phases by a CDK (e.g. Phosphorylation at this site would result in modification of one of the two phosphosites controlling ERK:KTR nuclear-to-cytosolic translocation. Each sample was then desalted by C18 solid phase extraction and concentrated to ~100 μL. Each sample was then desalted by C18 solid phase extraction and concentrated to ~100 μL. Each sample was then desalted by C18 solid phase extraction and concentrated to ~100 μL. Pan-RAF inhibitors inhibited pulsing over multiple days of drug exposure whereas SHP099 acted transiently (Figure 3B), but neither was as effective as 1-μM cobimetinib (Figures 3A and S1C). Phosphorylation of downstream signaling proteins was monitored by immunofluorescence. A similar biphasic response of pERK to cobimetinib was observed using three other growth factors (Figures 4I and 4J). This is surprising because protein kinase inhibitors usually act by blocking the ability of kinases to phosphorylate downstream substrates, in this case ERK, and not by blocking phosphorylation of the kinase being inhibited (i.e., MEK). 