Pericentrin labelling was maintained in the presence of zVAD.FMK, however, implicating caspases in this process (unpublished observations). As expected, fragmentation was blocked by zVAD.FMK, confirming that this is a caspase-dependent process (Fig. We therefore measured the affect of actin disruption in UV-treated A431 cells, but found no significantly influence fragmentation (although PARP cleavage was marginally elevated: Fig. Inclusion of fluorescent annexin V in the assay demonstrated that PS exposure occurs ~20–30 mins after the appearance of the first spikes (data not shown). Importantly, nocodazole treatment blocked spike formation (supplementary material Fig. In the presence of taxol, one or two much thicker spikes were produced, but these were clearly abnormal (supplementary material Fig. Time-lapse imaging revealed that EB1-GFP puncta (Morrison et al , 2002) continue to track with a subset of microtubules in apoptotic A431 cells, with movement almost exclusively away from the cell body (Fig. 8B and supplementary material Movie 7), suggesting that they are dynamic and predominantly plus ends outwards. However, these are soon replaced by extensive, dynamic bundles that perform three important roles: firstly, they contribute to the relocation of condensed chromatin into surface blebs; secondly, microtubules are required for cellular fragmentation; thirdly, by extending rigid cellular spikes, microtubules assist in apoptotic cell to phagocyte tethering. Although we cannot rule out the former explanation, the fact that just a brief (40 mins) nocodazole treatment of apoptotic cells caused withdrawal of chromatin back towards the cell centre suggests that microtubules most likely resist some form of retractile pressure. Contractility generated by actin and active myosin II is the best candidate here – it is believed to provide the cortical squeezing forces that drive apoptotic surface blebbing (Coleman et al , 2001; Mills et al , 1998b; Mills et al , 1999; Sebbagh et al , 2001), and it deforms the nuclear envelope to allow chromatin budding (Croft et al , 2005; Lane et al , 2005). Due to our previous lack of appreciation of the presence of an apoptotic microtubule array (see (Mills et al , 1999)), the roles of actin-microtubule cross-linking proteins during apoptosis remain largely unexplored, although some are known to be caspase targets (including APC, cytoplasmic dynein/dynactin, plectin: see (Fischer et al , 2003)). Our data show that microtubules contribute to the process of apoptotic body formation by helping to sustain the peripheral localisation of chromatin within surface blebs, and by facilitating cell fragmentation. Inhibitors were used at the following final concentrations: latrunculin A (1.0 μM); Y27632 (100 μM); blebbistatin (12.5μm); nocodazole (5 μg/ml); taxol (20 μM); zVAD.FMK (50 μM). Fluorescence microscopy and live-cell imagingWide-field fluorescence images were obtained using an Olympus IX-71 inverted microscope (60x Uplan Fluorite objective 0.65–1.25 NA, at maximum aperture) fitted with a CoolSNAP HQ CCD camera (Photometrics, Tucson, AZ) driven by MetaMorph software (Universal Imaging Corporation, Downington, PA). Addition of either drug individually caused a moderate shift from dispersed to compact chromatin (Fig. In support of this, the majority of apoptotic microtubules were not recognised by antibodies to acetylated α-tubulin – a post-translational modification indicative of long-lived polymer ((Maruta et al , 1986): supplementary material Fig. 