In all samples with SirT1 deleted, there were reductions in Nanog and Klf2 proteins and increases in Fgf5 and Otx2 proteins (Figure 3C). To define genes whose transcripts are activated or repressed by Oct4, we used previously reported Oct4 ChIPseq data in the naïve and EpiLC state (Buecker et al , 2014) and our RNAseq expression data in the wild type naïve and primed EpiLC states. There was a clear normalization toward the wild type naïve transcriptome profile in these cells (Figure 5A-B), indicating that the upregulation of Otx2 per se helps drive the shift toward the primed state in SirT1 knockout ES cells.Otx2 is thought to promote the primed state through the binding and genomic reorganization of Oct4. In this report, we describe a close association between SirT1 and Oct4 in embryonic stem cells, both physically and functionally. While acetylation of both Sox2 (Mu et al , 2015) and Oct4 increase in ES cells lacking SirT1, only Oct4 occupancy of the Otx2 enhancer was significantly elevated, consistent with the model that acetylation of Oct4 may be driving the naïve to primed transition. In addition, human induced pluripotent stem (IPS) cells also exhibit features of the primed state of pluripotency (Yamanaka et al , 2007; Yu et al , 2007), while mouse IPS cells naturally revert to the naïve state (Takahashi and Yamanaka, 2006). For example, toxic environmental agents could trigger DNA damage, activation of PARPs, depletion of NAD and inactivation of SirT1, thereby imposing a roadblock to continued embryonic development. Co-IPs were performed using Pierce’s direct co-IP kit. FASTQ files were aligned to the NCBI37/mm9 reference genome using the Tophat aligner. Chromatin Immunoprecipitation qPCRChromatin immunoprecipitations were performed using the SimpleChIP Enzymatic Chromatin IP kit (Cell Signaling). Oct4 enhancer activity shifts from a distal enhancer dependent on Oct4 itself in naïve cells to a proximal, Oct4-independent enhancer in primed cells without affecting the total expression level of the gene (Buecker et al , 2014; Yang et al , 2014). We also found that SirT1 is localized within the nucleus as evidenced by its colocalization with DAPI and the activating histone modification, (H3K4me3)(Heintzman et al , 2007) (Figure 1D). No SirT1 signal was detected in SirT1 null embryonic stem cells demonstrating the specificity of the antibody (Figure 1B).To assess SirT1 expression during the naïve to prime transition we employed the previously described EpiLC differentiation protocol (Buecker et al , 2014; Hayashi et al , 2011; Yang et al , 2014). Genome wide transcriptional analysis of naïve ES cells and EpiLCs revealed significant overlap with previously characterized primed pluripotency datasets (Kim et al , 2013; Buecker et al , 2014) (Figure S1 A-D). 931 of these genes overlap with the differential expression observed during the transition from wild type naïve ES cells to wild type primed EpiLCs. 