For this purpose, we sequenced exon 2 of PRKCI from genomic DNA prepared from our panel of cell lines. We focused on exon 2 of PRKCI because it encodes the PB1 domain of PKCι, including Cys69, the specific amino acid residue within PKCι targeted by ATM 7. A427 and H460 cell tumors from ATM-treated mice exhibited reduced levels of phospho-Erk 1,2 when normalized to total Erk (phospho-Erk/total Erk) (Figure 4D). This dismal clinical outlook has prompted a search for more effective strategies to treat NSCLC. SCLC is difficult to treat and few therapeutic options exist for the substantial number of SCLC patients that fail standard therapy. SCLC is difficult to treat and few therapeutic options exist for the substantial number of SCLC patients that fail standard therapy. Our current results indicate that ATM may be particularly effective in lung tumors that harbor PRKCI amplification since the two most ATM responsive tumor cell lines in our study harbor PRKCI amplification. These data argue that PKCι over-expression, rather than PRKCI gene amplification per se, is an important characteristic of ATM response. However, our present results provide a compelling rationale for the clinical development of ATM for the treatment of lung cancer, and provide a molecular basis for patient stratification in ongoing clinical trials of ATM. Anchorage-independent Growth AssaysAnchorage-independent growth was assessed by the ability to grow as colonies in soft agar in the presence of chemotherapeutic agents at the concentrations indicated in the figures as described previously 6. The concentration of chemotherapeutic agent resulting in 50% growth inhibition (IC50) was calculated using SigmaPlot for Windows10.0 (San Jose, CA). Protein concentrations were determined using the Pierce bicinchoninic acid (BCA) Protein Assay Kit (Pierce Biotechnology, Rockford, IL) using bovine serum albumin (BSA) as a standard. RNA Isolation and Quantitative PCRTotal RNA was extracted using RNAqueous (Ambion, Austin, TX), according to the manufacturer's protocols. Reagents for quantitative real time PCR (QPCR) analysis of human PKCι, Par6α, Par6β, Par6γ, p62, TrxR1 and TrxR2 mRNA abundance were purchased from Applied Biosystems (Foster City, CA). The presence of mutations in EGFR, and to a lesser extent, the presence of EGFR amplification and elevated EGFR expression, correlate positively with therapeutic response to the TKIs gefitinib and erlotinib 3. Sections were subjected to immunohistochemical analysis using antibodies to expression of BrdU, TUNEL and PECAM1 as described previously 6. Mice were anesthetized by CO2 inhalation and the caudal (inferior) vena cava was identified and dissected free of surrounding connective tissue. These molecular and clinical characteristics have been used successfully to guide TKI therapy to patients most likely to respond. These molecular and clinical characteristics have been used successfully to guide TKI therapy to patients most likely to respond. Clearly, there exists a need to identify effective mechanism-based therapeutics that target prevalent molecular characteristics in lung cancer patients who are not responsive to currently available therapy. 