ssAAV-CAG-mNeGreen-f refers to ssAAV-CAG-mNeonGreen-f-WPRE with a human growth hormone polyA signal. The reaction products were then treated with Plasmid Safe (PS) DNase (Epicentre; E3105K) to digest any unassembled fragments and purified using a QIAquick PCR Purification Kit (Qiagen). Viral media was concentrated by precipitation with 8% polyethylene glycol 8000 (Sigma-Aldrich) with 500 mM sodium chloride47, resuspended in Tris-MgCl2, and then added to the lysates. Seven to eight days post-injection, mice were euthanized and the brain and spinal cord were collected. To purify viral DNA, the upper aqueous fraction was collected according to the manufacturer's extraction protocol. Vector genomes were detected using PCR primers that bind to the WPRE element and were normalized to mouse genomes using primers specific to the mouse glucagon gene. IHC was performed on floating sections with primary and secondary antibodies in PBS containing 10% goat or donkey serum and 0.5% Triton X-100 (no detergent was used for GAD67 staining). Primary antibodies incubations were performed for 16-24 hrs at RT. Tissue clearingMice were perfused as above with 60-80 mL of ice-cold 4% PFA in PB at a flow rate of 14 mL per minute. The mice were then placed in individual custom-built chambers24 and perfused with 200 mL of recycling RT 4% acrylamide in PB at 2-3 mL/min overnight followed by a 2-hr perfusion flush with PB to remove residual polymers/monomers from the vasculature. Briefly, iPSC lines derived from two healthy control individuals were grown on inactivated mouse embryonic fibroblast feeders in the following medium: DMEM/F12, Knockout Serum 20%, 1 mM non-essential amino acids (1:100), GlutaMax (1:200), β-mercaptoethanol (0.1 mM), penicillin and streptomycin (1:100) (Life Technologies). From day 43 onwards, cortical spheroids were maintained in NPC medium, which was changed every 4 days. After the second selection, several variants were enriched (Supplementary Table 2) and showed enhanced CNS transduction (Supplementary Fig. Using PARS-based CLARITY for whole body tissue clearing24, we imaged native eGFP fluorescence through cleared sections of tissue from the spinal cord (Fig. Outside the CNS, the cellular level tropism of AAV-PHP.B and AAV9 appeared similar in several organs, with the exception of the pancreas where the efficiency of transduction by AAV-PHP.B was reduced as compared with AAV9 (Fig. AAV-PHP.B provided significantly greater gene transfer than AAV9 to each of the CNS regions examined: cortex (40-fold), striatum (92-fold), thalamus (76-fold), cerebellum (41-fold) and spinal cord (75-fold). Therefore, although the tropism of AAV-PHP.B is not CNS specific, the enhanced gene transfer characteristics of this vector are CNS specific. In all cases, AAV-PHP.B provided significantly enhanced transduction as compared to the same dose of AAV9. 4a-d), as well as reduced tropism for the liver (Fig. HiPSC lines from two individuals were differentiated into 3D cerebral cortex-like structures (cortical spheroids), and maintained in vitro for up to 200 days. 