One specific recurrent deletion (8.2 kb) eliminated exons 6 through 8 (Fig. They recur in independent tumors, involve multiple sets of cRSSs, overlap one another over a specific area of the locus and may provide for production of a modified (rather than absent) protein product. cRSS-mediated deletions and candidate driver mutationsCryptic RSS junctions affected genes with a potential oncogenic impact in that they govern cell proliferation, differentiation or survival. Almost 90% of cRSS junctions in the collection interrupted a gene and well over half of these genes (65%) were associated with cancer (for additional details see Supplemental Experimental procedures and Table S4). When a coding joint is created by deletion, the signal joint will occur on an excised circular DNA molecule ((Fujimoto and Yamagishi, 1987), Fig. To maximize the possibility of detection, we focused the effort on recurrent cRSS rearrangements. (Identification of cTrecs corresponding to potential oncogenic events does not, however, mean they are related to founder mutations, but rather reflects the evolving, multiclonal nature of the lymphomas, as noted in the Discussion.) This is the translocation between chr4 and chr14 creating a signal joint composed of the RSS of a TCR Vα-gene segment (chr14) and a cryptic RSS within Kdm1a locus (chr4; Fig. Whereas there is little question that Notch1, Jak1, Ikzf1, Fhit, and Pten, all included in the short, expertly curated list of 572 COSMIC Cancer Gene Census (http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/census/), are drivers in the oncogenic process, the four remaining recurrently mutated genes occupy a gray zone.To address this, we developed a system for stratifying all the genes mutated in the present study according cancer relevance (Experimental Procedures and Table S4). By this approach, Nr3c1 and Phlda1 belong to the same group as the above-mentioned genes and can also be considered cancer-associated. Agpat9 (Table S4B) and Trat1 however have modest or no support for a cancer role in the literature (see Table S4C). It remains to be seen whether cRSS-mediated deletions pinpoint new cancer genes, but given the potential applications, this question bears further investigation. The commonly observed 8.2 kb cRSS-mediated deletion here is compatible with the possibility of an in-frame splice between exons 5 and 9 in the mRNA. 4), eliminating functions thought at present to be a pre-requisite for mediating the oncogenic effects of Jak1 activation. Engineered mouse models bearing mutant Rag2 alleles implicate the Rag2 C-terminal domain in curtailing the oncogenic potential of V(D)J recombination. 57 somatic SVs (range: 8–20) were identified in four Tp53−/− lymphomas and 218 SVs (range: 23–68) were detected in five Rag2352/352, Tp53−/− lymphomas (Fig. When each is plotted according to their two distance-to-breakpoint values, authentic V(D)J junctions fell into a tight cluster averaging 3 nucleotides from either CAC motif. The presence of two populations in our experimental data was confirmed by analyzing a set of 180 simulated junctions (see Supplemental Experimental Procedures), which reconstructed only the broadly scattered distribution (Fig. These arise when hairpin-terminated RAG cleavage intermediates are nicked a few bp from the terminus and the opened ends happen to escape trimming before becoming joined. 