Results indicated that, in contrast to its striking effects on dendritic growth, erbin depletion did not significantly reduce axon growth (total average axon lengths: vector, 692.4 ± 70.2 μm; shRNA 1, 774.6 ± 78.1 μm; p = 0.43). This shRNA was highly effective at reducing expression of δ-catenin in transiently transfected tsa201 cells and in cultured rat cortical neurons, as assessed by Western blot analysis (supplemental Fig. Results in Figure 5, A and B, show that total dendritic arbor length in murine neurons is reduced to similar extents by erbin-specific shRNA treatment of wild-type neurons, by genetic deletion of δ-catenin, and by erbin-specific shRNA treatment of δ-catenin-null neurons. Overexpression of δ-catenin, but not p120ctn, can rescue the loss of erbin phenotypeWe next sought to examine whether the reduction in dendritic arbor growth resulting from depletion of erbin can be rescued by overexpression of δ-catenin by examining neurons that had been transfected with a vector control, erbin-specific shRNA, or erbin-specific shRNA plus δ-catenin. It has been suggested that overexpression of δ-catenin inhibits RhoA via p190RhoGEF (Martinez et al , 2003; Kim et al , 2007) Furthermore, our lab has demonstrated previously that loss of p120ctn, a member of the same family as δ-catenin, results in a significant increase in the levels of active RhoA with a concomitant decrease in active Rac1 (Elia et al , 2006). EGFP-δ-catenin showed a somewhat diffuse distribution including concentration associated with dendrites and spines (supplemental Fig. 4A, available at www.jneurosci.org as supplemental material) and some diffuse fluorescence in axons. Expression of EGFP-δ-catenin with vector only resulted in a pattern similar to that observed with EGFP-δ-catenin alone, whereas coexpression of shRNA 1 to erbin resulted in a more punctate pattern of expression of EGFP δ-catenin (Fig. These punctate structures were observed in the cell bodies, dendrites and axons, but more prominently in dendrites and cell bodies. ShRNA constructsshRNA 1 for erbin and shRNA for δ-catenin were generated in the pSuper-GFP construct. shRNA 2 for erbin was generated in the lentivirus vector (pLLX3.1). The sequences for the erbin shRNA have been described previously (Huang et al , 2003; Rangwala et al , 2005; Dai et al , 2006) and are TAG ACT GAC CCA GCT GGA ATC TCT TGA ATT CCA GCT GGG TCA GTC TA for shRNA 1 and TGC ATC CCT CTA GAG AAC AAC TTT CAA GAG AAC TTG TTC TCT AGA GGG ATG C for shRNA 2. Transient transfection of tsa201 cellstsa201 cells were maintained in culture and transfected using calcium phosphate. Cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde/sucrose, washed with PBS, and mounted in the Antifade mounting medium or were processed for immunofluorescence with the appropriate primary antibodies and fluorescently conjugated secondary antibodies. Cells were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde/sucrose, washed with PBS, and mounted in the Antifade mounting medium or were processed for immunofluorescence with the appropriate primary antibodies and fluorescently conjugated secondary antibodies. Cells were transfected using the Effectene (Qiagen). Images were analyzed using the ImageJ software or manually. p values obtained from this test are indicated in the figure legends. Results showed that each shRNA was highly effective in reducing erbin expression (supplemental Fig. The rescue construct we used expresses only one of several human isoforms of erbin. 1E), with no significant effect on the number of primary dendrites (Fig. 