2D, black arrowhead) and caudal paravertebral ganglia (Fig. 2D, black arrowhead) and caudal paravertebral ganglia (Fig. However, significantly increased apoptosis was found in newborn Egr3−/− SCG (Fig. Thus, similar to neurotrophin- and neurotrophin signaling-deficient mice, sympathetic neuron death in Egr3−/− mice occurs by apoptosis at a developmental time point that coincides with active target tissue innervation and acquisition of NGF dependence.Embryonic and early postnatal sympathetic neurons depend upon NGF for their survival in vitro and in vivo, and >90% of them can be rescued from apoptosis in vitro when 10 ng/mL of NGF is present in the culture medium (Belliveau et al , 1997). 4D′, black arrowhead), they failed to normally branch and invade the splenic parenchyma (Fig. 4D′, arrow) compared to wild type (Fig. However, considering that Egr3 and Egr4, two closely related transcriptional regulators, have been shown to functionally cooperate with Egr1 to regulate some target genes such as luteinizing hormone β-peptide (LHβ), the neuroplasticity associated protein Arc, and the low-affinity neurotrophin receptor p75NTR (Gao et al , 2007; Li et al , 2005; Tourtellotte et al , 2000), it seemed plausible that other Egr proteins may have important roles in sympathetic neuron differentiation in vivo. Pineal glands were dissected for qPCR analysis at three time points during the 24 hour photo period: ZT13, ZT21 and ZT9, with ZT0 defined as the temporal onset of the dark-light transition. By contrast, in Egr3−/− pineal glands AANAT induction reached less than 20% of the maximal wild type induction (ZT21) after the onset of the dark phase before returning to baseline during the light phase of the cycle (Fig. To determine whether these abnormalities have physiologic significance, heart rate and myocardial contractility were measured in cardiac catheterized adult wild type and Egr3−/− mice. The closely related protein, Egr1 was considered to be a potential mediator of differentiation related gene transcription (Milbrandt, 1987). Although the quantitative and in vitro studies were focused on SCG neurons, a detailed analysis of Egr3−/− mice demonstrated widespread atrophy of sympathetic chain ganglia and target tissue innervation defects, indicating a global role for Egr3 in SNS development. However, unlike mice lacking NGF or its receptor TrkA, which lose most sympathetic neurons by birth (Crowley et al , 1994; Smeyne et al , 1994), we found that only about 1/3 of SCG neurons were lost in Egr3-deficient mice after birth, despite the fact that it is expressed in most, if not all, SCG neurons. Sympathetic neuron death may occur later in Egr3-deficient mice because abnormal terminal axon extension and branching within target tissues, which occurs relatively late during SNS development, would be expected to lead to relatively delayed defects in NGF acquisition. Cardiac physiologyMale and female adult wild type and Egr3−/− mice, weighing 18–23g, were used. Heart rate and myocardial contractility (change in pressure over time; dP/dt) measurements were compared before and after injection of the α2-adrenoreceptor antagonist, Yohimbine (YOH; 2 mg/kg, i.v.). Moreover, Egr3 induction was dependent upon MAPK signaling since pretreatment with the MEK inhibitor U0126 abrogated NGF-dependent Egr3 induction (Fig. 