Three out of 25 subjects were excluded due to the difficulty in localization of the nerve caused by low SNR attributing to either motion or extremely small size and individual variations in the shape and location of the sural nerve.Table 2 lists diffusion values obtained from 22 normal subjects who have been scanned using 6, 15, and 32 gradient directions. Our data demonstrate that DTI at 3 T can be effectively used to localize the sural nerve at mid to lower calf and measure its diffusion indices such as FA and ADC. Although anatomical images are commonly acquired in the axial image orientation for the identification of the small sural nerve by radiologists, the axial DTI may be prone to the prominent partial volume effect. Considering that those reported values were obtained with measurements from less number of gradient directions (Nd=6,15), the higher limit in our FA values at 6 and 15 directions (Table 2) were 0.768 (0.659+0.109) and 0.689 (0.615+0.074), respectively, making the measurements of the sural nerve using less Nd in closer agreement, though in lower limit, with the previously reported values of the tibial nerve. One limiting factor in our protocol described is a relatively long data acquisition time, which spans to 20 min for acquiring 32-directional DTI. In summary, we have successfully demonstrated that DTI at 3 T can be effectively used to localize the sural nerve at the mid to lower calf level and to measure FA and ADC values in normal healthy volunteers. Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) is a magnetic resonance (MR) technique that can be used for gaining quantitative information about tissue water diffusion. The aims of our study are to establish an optimal DTI protocol for evaluating sural nerves and normative FA and ADC values in healthy subjects. The EPI image acquired without diffusion weighting (b=0) was used for determining registration parameters for mapping diffusion data to anatomical volumes and the same transformation was used to map the FA values computed from DTI data acquired with 32, 15, and 6 gradient directions. By acquiring diffusion images in an adjusted coronal orientation (as described in Materials and methods) with the slice thickness of 0.5 mm, the sural nerve could be more easily localized and distinguished from the saphenous vein that runs in close proximity with the nerve.For each subject, an axial T2-weighted MRI scan was used to identify the sural nerve. 