Furthermore, there was no difference in the number of AB action potentials nor its firing frequency during the retractor and protractor phases of the VCN-gastric mill rhythm (AB Spike Number: Protraction, 6.0 ± 0.2; Retraction, 5.8 ± 0.1, p>0.05, n=4; Firing Frequency: Pro., 28.0 ± 1.8 Hz; Ret., 29.6 ± 1.1, p>0.05, n=4). In the absence of hyperpolarizing current injection, the AB action potentials always initiated near the STG and occurred later in the stn and son (n=10/10) (Fig. In contrast, when ABSTG was hyperpolarized, the AB action potentials occurred first in the son and propagated towards the STG (n=4/4) (Fig. These antidromic AB action potentials occurred in rhythmic bursts with a longer cycle period than the orthodromic AB bursts (Fig. 8C).We used these CoG-initiated AB action potential bursts, recorded intra-axonally in AB near the STG, to assess the possibility that AB was presynaptically inhibited during VCN-protraction. In several other motor systems, population coding is proposed to be the mechanism underlying the ability of single networks to generate multiple motor patterns (Georgopoulos, 1995; Kristan and Shaw, 1997; Lewis and Kristan, 1998; Liu and Fetcho, 1999). Briefly, the foregut was removed from the animal and pinned dorsal-side down in a Sylgard 170 (K.R. Anderson, Morgan Hill, CA, USA; World Precision Inc., Sarasota, FL, USA)-coated glass bowl in chilled C. borealis saline. Extracellular nerve recordings and axonal loose patch recordings were amplified using AM Systems Model 1700 AC Amplifiers (Carlsborg, WA) and Brownlee Precision Model 410 Amplifiers (Santa Clara, CA).Intracellular microelectrodes were made from borosilicate glass filled with 0.6 M K2SO4 plus 10 mM KCl (current clamp: 20–25 MΩ; voltage clamp: 8–12 MΩ). Extracellular nerve recordings and axonal loose patch recordings were amplified using AM Systems Model 1700 AC Amplifiers (Carlsborg, WA) and Brownlee Precision Model 410 Amplifiers (Santa Clara, CA).Intracellular microelectrodes were made from borosilicate glass filled with 0.6 M K2SO4 plus 10 mM KCl (current clamp: 20–25 MΩ; voltage clamp: 8–12 MΩ). Voltage-clamp gain was 0.7 to 2.5 nA/mV.To facilitate intracellular recordings, ganglia were desheathed and viewed with light transmitted through a darkfield condenser (Nikon, Tokyo, Japan). The VCN-gastric mill rhythm was triggered by extracellular stimulation of the dorsal posterior oesophageal nerve (dpon) (Fig. The POC-gastric mill rhythm was triggered by extracellular stimulation of the post-oesophageal commissure (poc) (Fig. All recordings were aligned to the peak of AB action potentials. A custom written script in Spike2 was used to digitally subtract the secondary unit after manually inspecting the trace to verify that only that particular unit was selected for subtraction.Figures were made using Spike2 and CorelDraw (Corel Corporation, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada). A custom written script in Spike2 was used to digitally subtract the secondary unit after manually inspecting the trace to verify that only that particular unit was selected for subtraction.Figures were made using Spike2 and CorelDraw (Corel Corporation, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada). The gastric mill rhythm (cycle period: ~5–20 sec) is a two phase motor pattern (protraction, retraction) that is usually not spontaneously active in vivo or in vitro (Fig. 